The aarakocra are a race of intelligent bird-men that live on thepeaks of the highest mountains, spending their days soaring onthe thermal winds in peace and solitude.Aarakocra are about 5 feet tall and have a wing span of 20 feet.About halfway along the edge of each wing is a hand with threehmman-sized fingers and an opposable thumb. An elongatedfourth finger extends the length of the wing and locks in place forflying Though the wing-hands cannot grasp during flight, theyare nearly as useful as human hands when an aarakocra is on theground and its wings are folded back. The wing muscles anchorin a bony chest plate that provides the aarakocra with extra pro¬tection. The powerful legs end in four sharp talons that can un¬lock and fold back to reveal another pair of functional hands,also with three human-sized fingers and an opposable thumb.The hand bones, like the rest of an aarakocra s skeleton, are hol¬low and fragile,Aarakocra faces resemble crosses between parrots and eagles.They have grav-black beaks, and black eyes set frontally in theirheads that provide keen binocular vision. Plumage color variesfrom tribe to tribe, but generally males are red, orange, and yel¬low while females are brown and gray.Aarakocra speak their own language, the language of giant ea¬gles, and, on occasion, the common tongue (10% chance).Combat: In aerial combat, an aarakocra fights with either tal¬ons or the heavy fletched javelins that he dutches In his lowerhands. An aarakocra typically carries a half dozen javelinsstrapped to his chest in individual sheaths. The javelins, whichcan be used for throwing or stabbing, inflict 2d4 points of dam¬age. Owing to the aarakocra s remarkable skill at throwing jave¬lins in the air, it incurs none of the attack penalties for aerialmissile fire. An aarakocra will always save its last javelin forslabbing purposes rather than throwing it . Its favorite attack is todive at a victim while clutching a javelin in each hand, then pul]out of the dive just as it reaches its target, and strike with ablood-curdling shriek. This attack gains a +4 bonus to the attackroll and causes double damage, but an aarakocra must dive atleast 200 feet to execute it properly.An aarakocra is reluctant to engage in grappling or groundcombat, since its fragile bones are easily broken. Though rarelyused except when cornered, an aarakocra's sharp beak can bitefor 1-3 points of damage.Habitat/Society: Aarakocra live in small tribes of about 11-30{Id20+IG) members, Each tribe has a hunting territory of about10,000 square miles with colorful banners and pennants markingthe boundaries.Each tribe lives in a communal nest made of woven vines witha soft lining of dried grass. The eldest male serves as the tribe sleader. In tribes of more than 20 members, the second oldest maleserves as the shaman, leading simple religious ceremonies involv¬ing the whistling of melodic hymns at sunset on the first day of anew month. Males spend most of their waking hours hunting forfood and occasionally for treasure, such as gems and other shinyobjects. Females spend eight months of the year incubating theireggs, passing the time by fabricating javelins and other toolsfrom wood and stone. While resting on their backs, aarakocrafemales can use all four hands at the same time to weave bound¬ary pennants, javelins sheaths, and other useful objects fromvines and feathers.Five aarakocra, including a shaman, can summon an air ele¬mental by chanting and performing an intricate aerial dance forthree melee rounds. The summoned air elemental will complywith the aarakocra^' request for a favor, though it will not endan¬ger its life on their behalf.Aarakocra are extremely claustrophobic and will not willinglyenter a cave, building, or other enclosed area.Ecology: Aarakocra have little to do with other species, includ¬ing neighboring aarakocra tribes, and leave their home territoryonly in extreme circumstances. They rarely encounter humansexcept for an occasional foray into a rural community to sna tch astray farm animal: this is not an intentionally malicious act asaarakocra are unable to distinguish between domestic and wildanimals. A human venturing into aarakocra territory may beable to convince one to serve as a guide or a scout in exchange fora shiny jewel or coin.
TelepathyTalse Sensor Input, Mindlink. Mass Domination.The aboleth is a loathsome amphibious creature that lives in sub¬terranean caves and lakes. It despises most land-dwelling crea¬tures and seeks to enslave Intelligent surface beings. It is as cruelas it is intelligent.An aboleth resembles a plump fish, 20 feet in length I mm itsbulbous head to its fluke-like fail. Its body is blue-green withgray splotches, and its pink-tan underbelly conceals a toothless,rubbery mouth. Three slit-like eyes, purple-red in color and pro¬tected by bony ridges, are set one atop the other in the front of itshead. Four pulsating blue-black orifices line the bottom of itsbody and secrete gray slime that smells like rancid grease. Fourleathery tentacles, each 10 feet in length, grow from its head. Anaboleth uses its tail to propel itself through the water and its ten¬tacles to drag itself along dry land.Combat The aboleth attacks with its tentacles tor ld6 points ofdamage each. If a victim struck by a tentacle fails a saving throw vs,spell, the victims skin transforms into a clear, slimy membrane inld4+l rounds. If this occurs, the victim must keep the membranedamp with cool water or suffer ldl2 points of damage each turn.Cure disease cast upon the victim before the membrane completelyforms stops the transformation. Otherwise, cure serious woundswill cause the membrane to revert to normal skin.Because its sluggish movement makes attacks difficult, theaboleth attempts to lure victims dose by creating realistic illu¬sions at will, complete with audible, olfactory, and other sensorycomponents. The aboleth can attempt to enslave creatures within30 feet: it can make three attempts per day one creature per at¬tempt. If the victim fails a saving throw vs. spell, he follows all ofthe aboleth's- telepathic commands, although the victim will notfight on the aboleth's behalf. The enslavement can be negated byremoue curse* dispel magic t the death of the enslaving aboleth,or, if the victim is separated from the aboleth by more than amile, a new saving throw (one attempt per day)When underwater, an aboleth surrounds itself with a mucouscloud 1 foot thick, A victim in contact with the cloud and inhal¬ing the mucus must roll a successful saving throw vs, poison orlose the ability to breathe air. The victim is then able to breathewater, as if having consumed a potion of water breathing* for 1-3hours. This ability may be renewed by additional contact withthe mucous cloud. An affected victim attempting to breathe airwill suffocate in 2d6 rounds. Wine or soap dissolves the mucus,Habitat/Society An aboleth brood consists of a parent and oneto three offspring. Though the offspring are as large and asstrong as the parent, they defer to the parent in all matters andobey it implicitly.Aboleth have both male and female sexual organs, A matureaboleth reproduces once every five years by concealing itself in acavern or other remote area, then laying a single egg and cover¬ing it in slime. The parent aboleth guards the egg while the em¬bryo grows and develops, a process that takes about five years.A newborn aboleth takes about 10 years to mature.The aboleth spends most of its time searching for slaves, pref¬erably human ones. It is rumored that the aboleth use their slavesto construct huge underwater cities, though none have ever beenfound. The aboleth are rumored to know ancient, horrible se¬crets that predate the existence of man, but these rumors are alsounsubstantiated. There is no doubt that aboleth retain a stagger¬ing amount of knowledge. An offspring acquires all of its parent'sknowledge at birth, and a mature aboleth acquires the knowl¬edge of any intelligent being it consumes.An aboleth's treasure consists of items taken from its slaves.The items are buried in caverns under a layer of slime resemblinggray mud, recognizable by the distinctive rancid grease odor.Ecology: The omnivorous aboleth will eat any organic matter,usually algae and micro-organisms, but they are also fond of in¬telligent prey so they can absorb nutrients and information at thesame time. Aboleth have no natural enemies, as even the mighti¬est marine creatures give them a wide berth. Aboleth slime issometimes used as a component for potions of water breathing .
The ankheg is a burrowing monster usually found in forests orchoice agricultural land. Because of its fondness for fresh meat,the ankheg is a threat to any creature unfortunate enough to en¬counter it.The ankheg resembles an enormous many-legged worm. Its sixlegs end in sharp hooks sui table for burrowing and grasping, andits powerful mandibles are capable of snapping a small tree inhalf with a single bite. A tough chitinous shell, usually brown oryellow, covers its entire body except for its soft pink belly Theankheg has glistening black eyes, a small mouth lined with tinyrows of chitinous teeth, and two sensitive antennae that can de¬tect movement of man-sized creatures up to 300 feet away.Combat: The ankheg's preferred attack method is to lie 5 to 10feet below the surface of the ground until its antennae detect theapproach of a victim. It then burrows up beneath the victim andattempts to grab him in its mandibles, crushing and grinding for3d6 points of damage per round while secreting acidic digestiveenzymes to cause an additional ld4 points of damage per rounduntil the victim is dissolved. The ankheg can squirt a stream ofacidic enzymes once every six hours to a distance of 30 feet.However, since it is unable to digest food for six hours after itsquirts enzymes, it uses this attack technique only when desper¬ate. A victim struck by the stream of acidic enzymes suffers 8d4points of damage (half damage if the victim rolls a successful sav¬ing throw vs. poison)*Habitat Society; The ankheg uses its mandibles to continuouslydig winding tunnels 30-40 feet deep in the rich soil of forests orfarmlands. The hollowed end of a tunnel serves as a temporarylair for sleeping, eating, or hibernating. When an ankheg ex¬hausts the food supply in a particular forest or Held, it moves onto another.Autumn is mating season for ankhegs. After the male fertilizesthe female, the female kills him and deposits 2d6 fertilized eggs inhis body. Within a few weeks, about 75% of the eggs hatch andbegin feeding. In a year, the young ankhegs resemble adults andcan function independently. Young ankhegs have 2 Hit Dice andan AC 2 overall and an AC 4 for their undersides; they bite forld4 points of damage twith an additional ld4 points of damagefrom enzyme secretions), and spit for 4d4 points of damage to adistance of 30 feet. In every* year thereafter, the ankheg functionswith full adult capabilities and gains an additional Hit Die until itreaches 8 Hit Dice.Beginning in its second year of life, the ankheg sheds its chitin-ous shell just before the onset of winter. It takes the ankheg twodays to shed its old shell and two weeks to grow a new one. Dur¬ing this time, the sluggish ankheg is exceptionally vulnerable. Itsoverall AC is reduced to 5 and its underside AC is reduced to 7.Additionally it moves at only half its normal speed. Us mandibleattack inflicts only IdlO points of damage, and it is unable tosquirt acidic enzymes. While growing a new shell, it protects it¬self by hiding in a deep tunnel and secreting a repulsive fluid thatsmells like rotten fruit. Though the aroma discourages most crea¬tures. it can also pinpoint the ankhegs location for humanhunters and desperately hungry predators.Ankhegs living in cold climates hibernate during the winter.Within a month after the first snowfall, the ankheg fashions a lairdeep within the warm earth where it remains dormant untilspring. The hibernating ankheg requires no food, subsisting in¬stead on nutrients stored in its shell. The ankheg does not secretearomatic fluid during this time and is thus relatively safe fromdetection. Though the ankheg's metabolism is reduced, its anten¬nae remain functional, able to alert it to the approach of an in¬truder, A disturbed ankheg fully awakens in Id4 rounds, afterwhich time it can attack and move normally.The ankheg does not hoard treasure. Items that were not dis¬solved by the acidic enzymes fall where they drop from theankhegs mandibles and can be found scattered throughout itstunnel system.Ecology: Though a hungry ankheg can be fatal to a farmer, itcan be quite beneficial to the farmland, Its tunnel system laces thesoil with passages for air and water, while the ankhegs wasteproducts add rich nutrients. The ankheg will eat decayed organicmatter in the earth, but it prefers fresh meat* All but the fiercestpredators avoid ankhegs. Dried and cured ankheg shells can bemade into armor with an AC of 2, and its digestive enzymes canbe used as regular acid.
The arcane are a race of merchants, found wherever there is po¬tential trade in magical items. They appear as tail lanky, bluegiants with elongated faces and thin fingers; each finger havingone more joint than is common in most humanoid life. The ar¬cane dress in robes, although there are individuals who are foundin heavier armor, a combination of chain links with patches ofplate (AC 3),Combat: For creatures of their size, the arcane are noticeablyweak and non-combative. They can defend themselves whencalled upon, but prefer to talk and/or buy themselves out of damgerous situations. If entering an area that is potentially danger¬ous (like most human cities), the arcane hires a group ofadventurers as his entourage.The arcane can become invisible , and can dimension door upto three times a day, usually with the intention of avoiding com¬bat. An arcane feels no concern about abandoning his entouragein chancy situations. They can also use any magical items, re¬gardless of the limitations of those items, This includes swords,wands, magical tomes, and similar items restricted to one type ofcharacter class. They will use such items if pressed in combat andthey cannot escape, but more often use them as bartering toolswith others.Arcane have a form of racial telepathy, such that an injury toone arcane is immediately known by all other arcane. The arcanedo noL seek vengeance against the one who hurt or killed theirfellow. They react negatively to such individuals, and dealingwith the arcane will be next to impossible until that individualmakes restitution.Habitat Society: Nothing is known about the arcane's origins:they come and go as they please, and are found throughout theknown worlds. When they travel, they do so on the ships andvehicles of other races. Finding such ships with arcane aboard israre, and it is suspected that the arcane have another way of trav¬elling over Jong distances.Contacting the arcane is no trouble in most civilized areas: afew words spread through the local grapevine, through taverns,guilds, and barracks, are enough to bring one of these creaturesto the surface. In game terms, there is a base 10% chance per dayof finding an arcane, if PCs actively look for one; the chance in¬creases or decreases depending on their location. Arcane neverset up permanent “magic shops."The arcane s stock in trade is to provide magical items, particu¬larly speltjamming helms, which allow rapid movement throughspace The arcanes' high quality and uniform (if high) pricesmake them the trusted retailers. They accept payment in gold, orbarter for other magical items (as a rule of thumb, costs should befive times the XP reward of the item, or a more valuable item).The arcane take no responsibility for the use of the items theysell. The arcane will deal with almost anyone. They often makedeals with both sides in a conflict, fully aware that they mightannihilate all of their potential customers in a region. The arcanehave no dealings with neogi, nor with creatures from otherplanes, such as genies, tanar ri, and fiends. It is unknown wheth¬er the arcane create a wide variety of magical devices, or securethem from an unknown source.Those dealing with the arcane find them cool, efficient, andmost importantly, uncaring. Trying to haggle with an arcane is achancy business, at best. Sometimes they will engage in hagglingwith a bemused smirk, but just as often leave the buyer hangingand walk out on the negotiations. They do not like being threat¬ened, insulted, or blackmailed. Those who do so will find it verydifficult to purchase reliable equipment. An arcane will not raisehis hand in vengeance or anger—there are more subtle ways towreak revenge.Ecology: It is not known what arcane do with the gold, gems,and magic they collect, One theory says they need the items forreproduction (the basis for a large number of bawdy arcanejokes), while another links it to production and acquisition ofmore magical items, The arcane seem sexless. No young arcanehave been reported, and the arcane keep their own counsel.
Argos are found in the same regions of wildspace as the balefulbeholder nations. An argos resembles a giant amoeba. It has onelarge, central eye with a tripartite pupil, and a hundred lashless,inhuman eyes and many sharp-toothed mouths. An argos can ex¬trude several pseudopods, each tipped with a fanged maw thatfunctions as a hand to manipulate various tools.Argos move by slithering; they can cling to walls and ceilings.They can levitate and fly at the very slow rate of 3.Argos colors tend toward shades of transparent blues and vio*lets; they smell like a bouquet of flowers, They are huge beastsranging in size from 10 to 20 feet in diameter, weighing about 200pounds per Hit Die, Though they exhibit signs of being intelligenttool users, they do not wear clothes, choosing rather to carrygear stored in temporary cavities within their bodies. However,their digestive juices often ruin devices within two to three weeks(saving throw vs. add).Combat; An argos can attack with one to three weapons oritems, or it can enfold a victim in a pseudopod and attack withId3 mouths for Id4 points of damage each. It may attack asmany foes in this way as it can physically reach.If an argos rolls a natural 20 on an attack, it envelopes its vic¬tim, swallowing him whole, A swallowed victim suffers 2d8points of damage each round from the creatures digestive juices.The victim may attempt to cut his way free from within, usingonly short cutting weapons. He must inflict 8 points of damage tobreak free.The eyes of an argos, like those of a beholder, have a variety ofspecial powers. An argos can bring IdlO of its smaller eyes tobear on any target. The large, central eye can focus only on tar¬gets that are in front of the creature (within 90 degrees of the"'straight-ahead point" of the central eye). Though the creaturehas nearly 100 eyes, only 20 special powers have been noted:therefore a number of eyes must possess the same power.Each point of damage inflicted on an argos eliminates one eye;the DM decides which powers are reduced in the process. It ispossible to target one particular eye by attacking with a -4 pen¬alty to the attack roll.Each ability of an argoss eye is treated as a spell effect. Use theargoss Hit Dice as the caster level* Roll ld2G and check the fol¬lowing table for a particular eye's power.The centra] eye can use one of three different powers once perround. It can create a personal illusion fan alter self spell), or itcan cast a co/or spray or a ray of enfeeblement spell.Habita(/Society: Argos are solitary creatures, though it is not un¬heard of to discover an argos guardian aboard an eye tyrant ship,Argos appear capable ot replenishing their own air envelope andthus may be encountered wandering asleroid rings and dustclouds alone*Despite its relative intelligence, the argos is a ravenous crea¬ture driven by its hunger. It tries to lure prey into its grasp, feed¬ing until it has consumed a number of creatures equal to twotimes its own Hit Dice. It then slips away to digest its meal for aperiod equal to two hours per Die. If an argos is unable to findfood within a week of its last meal, it loses 1 Hit Die per weekuntil it becomes a 5-Hit Die creature. After that point, it can hi¬bernate for up to a year by crystallizing its outer shell and form¬ing a chrysalis.Ecology; Argos consume anything that moves and is digestible.Their preference is to use their abilities to lure their prey intotraps and then to pick off individuals one at a time. It sortsthrough the tools and weapons of its victims and keeps the usefulitems.
Despite being only the size of a large badger, the aurumvorax,or ' golden gorged' is an incredibly dangerous creature. The ani¬mal is covered with coarse golden Hair and has small silver eyeswith golden pupils, it has eight powerful legs that end in 3-inch-long copper daws. The aurumvoraxs shoulders are massivelymuscled while its heavy jaw is hill of coppery teeth.The creature weighs over 500 pounds. This incredible densityprovides the animal with much of its natural protection. This,combined with its speed, power, and sheer viciousness, makes itone of the most dangerous species yet known.Combat: The aurumvorax charges any creature that enters itsterritory, causing a -3 to opponents' surprise rolls if attackingfrom its den. A female of the species receives a +2 bonus to at¬tack rolls when guarding her young.The creature bites at its prey until it hits, clamping its massivejaws onto the victim and doing 2 S hit points of damage. After ithits, the aurumvorax locks its laws and hangs on, doing an addi¬tional 8 points of damage per round until either the aurumvoraxor its enemy is dead. Only death will cause the aurumvorax torelax Us grip.Once its laws lock, the golden gorger also rakes its victim with2^8 of its legs, causing 2-8 hit points of damage per additional hit.An opponent who is held by an aurumvorax receives no dexteri¬ty adjustment to Armor Class,Due to its incredibly dense hide and bones, the aurumvoraxtakes only half damage from blunt weapons. It is immune to theeffects of small, normal fires and takes only half damage frommagical fires. Neither poison nor gasses have any effect, on thesturdy creature.Habitat Society: The aurumvorax makes its solitary home inlight forests, hills, and at the timberline on mountainsides. Anaurumvorax chooses a likely spot and then uses its powerfullyclawed legs to create a burrow, sometimes into solid rock.Due to their unusual dietary needs, aurumvorae make theirlairs in spots that either contain rich veins of gold ore or are verynear to an area where gold is readily available.The aurumvorax ss a solitary creature which jealously guardsits territory, even from others of its kind. The only time adultaurumvorae willingly meet is during mating season, which oc¬curs approximately every eight years,The pair will stay together for a week or two before the malereturns to his territory and the female prepares for the birth ofher kits. A litter of ld6 +2 kits is bom four months after mating.For the first two weeks of life, the kits are blind and hairless.They must be fed both meat and precious ores, including gold, inorder to survive. It is unusual for more than 1-2 of the strongestkits to survive. If a kit is found and "adopted 4 ' before its eyes areopen, it can be tamed and trained.Dwarves tend to dislike aurumvorae. though some communi¬ties have been known to raise one or more of the beasts for use insniffing out veins of ore.Ecology: In order to survive, the aurumvorax supplements Itscarnivorous diet with quantities of gold. The ability to digest andutilize gold and other ores makes it possible for the creature todevelop the dense fur, hide, and bones that protect it so well.If an aurumvorax is killed with a minimum of cutting damageto its hide, the hide may be turned into a garment of incrediblestrength and beauty worth 15,000-20,000 gold pieces. The gar¬ment will also protect its wearer as armor, the specific ArmorClass depending on the size of the aurumvorax. A garment withAC 2 weighs 50 pounds, one with AC 3 weighs 40 pounds, andone with AC 4 weighs 30 pounds.The wearer also receives a +4 bonus on saving throws vs. nor¬mal fires and a +2 bonus on saving throws vs. magical fire.If an aurumvorax is burned in a forge, approximately 150-200pounds of gold are left behind. This burning process is very diffi¬cult and usually takes between one and two weeks to perform.Of courser the hide may be removed before the creature isburned; if burned at the same time, the hide will provide an addi¬tional 21-40 (ld20+20) pounds of gold.The aurumvoraxs teeth and claws are abo prized for decora¬tion, and can bring up to 1 gp each on the open market.
General; The baatezu are the primary inhabitants of the NineHells, They are a strong, evil tempered race held together by anequally strong organization. The baatezu live in a rigid caste sys¬tem where authority is derived from power and station.The baatezu wish to fulfil! their ancient quest to destroy thetanarTi, their blood enemies. The baatezu also know that by in¬filtrating humans and entering their world they will gain powerover the tanar'ri, Toward this end they constantly strive to domi¬nate the Prime Material plane and its natives.The baatezu are divided into three groups: greater, lessen andleast. Below are listed a few:In addition, there are the lemures, the common 'foot soldiers"of the baatezu at the very bottom in station.Combat: AH baatezu except for lemures, nupperibo, and spina -gon are able to perform the following magical abilities, once perround, at wilh advanced illusion animate dead, charm person ,infravision, know alignment (always active), suggestion, andteleport without errorBaatezu are affected by the following attack forms:‘the gelugon suffers half damage from fire and none from cold,‘^unless affected by normal weapons,** "greater baatezu suffer half damage from silver weapons.Pit Fiend: The most terrible baatezu of the Nine Kelts, pit fiendsappear to be giant, winged humanoids, very much like gargoylesin appearance, with huge wings that wrap around their bodiesfor defense. Pit fiend's fangs are large and drip with a vile, greenliquid. Their bodies are red and scaly, often emitting flames whenthey are angered or excited. In the rare situations they choose tocommunicate, they use telepathy.Combat: In physical combat, the pit fiend is capable of dealingout tremendous punishment, using its incredible 18/00 Strength( +6 damage adjustment). They can attack six times in a singleround, dividing attacks against six different opponents. They cartattack with tw T o hard, scaly wing buffets for 1-4 points of damageper hit. Their powerful claws do 1-6 points of damage per suc¬cessful attack. The bite of a pit fiend is dreadful indeed, causingany creature bitten to take 2-12 points of damage and receive alethal dose of poison. A saving throw vs. poison is required orthe victim dies in 1-4 rounds. The bite also infects the victim witha disease,Pit fiends can abo attack with their tail every round, inflicting2-8 points of damage per hit, The tail can then hold and constrictthe victim for 2-8 points of damage per round until the victimmakes a successful Strength check to break free. Pit fiends canalso carry Jagged-toothed clubs which inflict 7-12 points of dam¬age per hit (this replaces one claw attack).Once per round a pit fiend can use one of the following spell¬like powers, plus those available to all baatezu: detect magic, de¬tect invisibility, fireball hold person, improved invisibilitypolymorph self r produce flame , pyrotechnics, and of fire.They can f once per year, cast a wish spell* They may alwaysgate in two lesser or one greater baatezu with a 100% chance ofsuccess, performing this action once per round. Once per day, apit Bend can use a symbol of pain— the victim must save vs, rod,staff or wand or suffer a - 4 penalty on attack dice, and a -2 pen¬alty to Dexterity for 2-20 rounds.Pit fiends regenerate 2 hit points per round and radiate a fearaura in a 20-foot radius (save vs. rod, staff, or wand at a-3 penal¬ty or flee in panic for 1-10 rounds).Habita t Society: Pit fiends are the lords of the Nine Hells. Theyare the baatezu of the greatest power and the highest station. Pitfiends are found throughout the various layers of the Nine Hells,but are very rare on the upper layers,Wherever they are found, these mighty lords hold a position ofgreat authority and power. They sometimes command vast le¬gions consisting of dozens of complete armies, leading them intobattle against the tanarTi. These huge forces are terrifying to be*hold, and any non-native of the lower planes, of less than 10 HitDice, who sees them, flees in panic for 1-3 days. Those of 10 HitDice or more must make a saving throw vs. rod, staff, or wandor flee in panic for 1-12 turns.Ecology: Pit fiends are spawned from the powerful gelugcms ofthe Nine Hells eighth layer, When those icy fiends are foundworthy they are cast into the Pit of Flame for l f 0Gl days afterwhich they emerge as pit fiends.Abishai: Abishai are common on the first and second layers ofthe Nine Hells, appearing much like gothic gargoyles. They arethin and reptilian with long, prehensile tails and great wings.There are three varieties of abishai. They are, in ascending orderof station, black, green, and red. Abishai communicate with te*lepathy.Combat: In battle, the abishai strikes with formidable daws, in¬flicting 1-4 points of damage per successful hit. It can also lashout with its flexible tail for 2-5 points of damage. Hidden in theend of an abishai's tad is a small stinger that infects poison on asuccessful hit, requiring a $a% F ing throw vs. poison (failure resultsin death).Abishai can fly into the air and dive at enemies, striking withboth daws. Their attack roll is made with a + 2 bonus. A success¬ful hit inflicts double damage.In addition to the powers possessed by all baatezu. an abishaican perform the following magical powers, one at a time, onceper round: change self, command, produce flame, pyrotechnics *and scare. They can also attempt to gate 2-12 lemures (60%chance of success, once per day) or 1-3 abishai (30% chance ofsuccess, once per day)*AJ1 abishai are susceptible to damage from holy water. If a vialis splashed on it, an abishai suffers 2-8 points of damage. Allabishai regenerate 1 hit point per melee round unless the damagewas done by holy water or a holy magical weapon.Habitat Society: Abishai are voracious and evil. They delight intormenting those few natives of the Nine Hells that are lower inpower. Abishai are fond of using change self and charm person totempt mortals bold enough to travel to the Nine Hells*Ecology: The abishai comprise the main body of many large, evilarmies battling against the tanar’ri and intruders against the NineHells, In some cases, a red abishai may have proven himself wor¬thy enough to command a force of lemures. If it is successful inthis endeavor, the red abishai may be promoted to a higher formof baatezu,
The banshee or groaning spirit, is the spirit of an evil female elf—a very rare thing indeed. Banshee hate the living, finding theirpresence painful, and seek to harm whomever they meet.Banshees appear as floating, luminous phantasms of theirformer selves. Their image glows brightly at night, but is trans¬parent in sunlight (60% invisible), Most banshees are old andwithered, but a few (10%) who died young retain their formerbeauty. The hair of a groaning spirit is wild and unkempt. Herdress is usually tattered rags. Her face is a mask of pain and an¬guish. but hatred and ire bums brightly in her eyes. Banshees fre¬quently cry out in pain—hence their name.Combat: Banshees are formidable opponents. The mere sightof one causes fear, unless a successful saving throw vs. spell isrolled. Those who fail must flee in terror for 10 rounds and are50% likely to drop any items they were carrying in their hands.A banshees most dreaded weapon is its wail or keen. Anycreature within 30 feet of a groaning spirit when she keens mustroll a saving throw vs. death magic. Those who fail die immedi¬ately, their face contorted in horror. Fortunately, groaning spiritscan keen just once per day and then only at night. The touch of agroaning spirit causes ld8 points of damage,Banshees are noncorporeal and invulnerable to weapons ofless than +1 enchantment. In addition, groaning spirits are high¬ly resistant to magic (50%), They are fully immune to charm,sleep, and hold spells and to cold- and electricity-based attacks.Holy water causes 2d4 points of damage if broken upon them.An dispel evU spell will kill a groaning spirit. A banshee is turnedas a ‘ special" undead,Banshees can sense the presence of living creatures up to fivemiles away. Any creature that remains within five miles of agroaning spirit lair is sure to be attacked when night falls. Thenature of this attack varies with the victim. Beasts and lessthreatening characters are killed via a touch. Adventurers ordemihumam are attacked by keening. Creatures powerfulenough to withstand the groaning spirit's keen are left alone.When attacking adventurers, the groaning spirit attacks atnight with her wad. If any characters save successfully she thenretreats to her lair. Thereafter, each night, the groaning spirit re¬turns to wail again, This routine is repeated until all of the vic¬tims are dead or have left the groaning spirits domain, or untilthe groaning spirit is slain.Habitat'Society: Banshees loathe all living things and thusmake their homes in desolate countryside or ancient ruins. Therethey hide by day when they cannot keen, and wander the sur¬rounding countryside by night. The land encircling a groaningspirit's lair is strewn with the bones of beasts who heard thegroaning spirit's cry. Once a groaning spirit establishes her lairshe will remain there.The treasure of groaning spirits varies considerably and oftenreflects what they loved in life. Many hoard gold and fine gems.Other groaning spirits, particularly those that haunt their formerhomes, show finer tastes, preserving great works of art andsculptures, or powerful magical items.It is nearly impossible to distinguish the cry of a groaning spiritfrom that of a human or elf woman in pain. Many a knight gal¬lant has mistaken the two sounds, and then paid for the mistakewith his life. Banshees are exceptionally intelligent and speak nu¬merous languages, including common, elvish, and other demi-human languages.Banshees occasionally use their destructive powers to seek re¬venge against their former adversaries in life.Ecology: Banshees are a blight upon wherever they settle. Theykill without discretion, and their only pleasure is the misfortuneand misery of oLhers. In addition to slaying both man and beast,a groaning spirits keen has a powerful effect upon vegetation.Flowers and delicate plants wither and die and trees grow twistedand sickly, while hardier plants, thistles and the like, flourish.After a few years all that remains within five miles of a groaningspirit's lair is a desolate wilderness of warped trees and thornsmixed with the bones of those creatures that dared to cross intothe groaning spirit's domain.These reptilian monsters all posses a gaze that enables them toturn any Fleshy creature to stone; their gaze extends into the As¬tral and Ethereal planes.Although it has eight legs, its sluggish metabolism allows only aslow movement rate, A basilisk is usually dull brown in color,with a yellowish underbelly. Its eyes glow pale green.Combat: While it has strong, toothy jaws, the basilisks majorweapon is its gaze. However, if its gaze is reflected, and it sees itsown eyes, it will become petrified itself, but this requires light atleast equal to bright torchlight and a good, smooth reflector. Inthe Astral plane its gaze kills; in the Ethereal plane it turns vic¬tims into ethereal stone. These will only be seen by those in theEthereal plane or who can see ethereal objects.The greater basilisk is a larger cousin of the more common reptil¬ian horror, the ordinary basilisk. These monsters are typicallyused to guard treasure.Combat: The monster attacks by raising its upper body strikingwith sharp claws, and biting with its toothy maw. The daws car¬ry Type K poison (saving throws vs. poison are made with a +4bonus). Its foul breath is also poisonous, and all creatures, com¬ing within 5 feet of its mouth, even if just for a moment, must rollsuccessful saving throws vs. poison (with a+ 2 bonus) or die(check each round of exposure).Even if a polished reflector is used under good lighting condi¬tions , the chance for a greater basilisk to see its own gaze andbecome petrified is only 10%, unless the reflector is within 10 feetof the creature. (While its gaze weapon is effective to 50 feet, thecreatures oddly-shaped eyes are nearsighted and it cannot see itsown gaze unless it is within 10 feet, tThe sages say that the dracolisk is the offspring of a rogue blackdragon and a basilisk of the largest size.The result is a deep brown, dragon-1 ike monster that moveswith relative quickness on six legs. It can fly but only for shortperiods—a turn or two at most.Combat; This horror can attack with its ialoned forelegs and de¬liver vicious bites. Ln addition, it can spit a stream of acid 5 feetwide and up to 30 feet away. The acid causes 4d6 points of dam¬age, half-damage if a successful saving throw vs, breath weaponis rolled. The dracolisk can spit up to three rimes per day.The eyes of a dracolisk can petrify any opponent within 20 feetif the monsters gaze ts met. Because its hooded eyes have nictat¬ing membranes, the monster is only 10% likely to be affected byits own gaze. Opponents in melee with a dracolisk and seeking toavoid its gaze fight with a ^4 penalty to their to attack rolls.
Bats are common animals in many parts of the world. While or¬dinary bats are annoying but harmless, larger varieties can bequite deadly. With almost 2,000 different species of bats known,one can find wingspans from less than two inches across to 15feet or more. The small body of the ordinary bat resembles amouse, while the wings are formed from extra skin stretchedacross its fore limbs. The larger bats are scaled up but otherwisesimilar in appearance.Despite the common belief that bats are blind, nearly allknown species have rather good eyesight, in the dark, however,they do not rely on their visual acuity, but navigate instead byecho-location. By emitting a high-pitched squeal and listening forit to bounce back to them, they can see" their surroundings bythis natural form of sonarCombat: Ordinary bats attack only it cornered and left with noother option. If startled, bats tend to become frightened and con¬fused. This causes them to swarm around and often fly intothings. The typical bat swarm ends up putting out torches (3 %chance per bat encountered per round), confusing spell casting(Wisdom roll required to cast spells), inhibiting combatants' abil¬ity to wield weapons (by a —2 THACO penalty), and otherwisegetting in the way. Under ideal Flying conditions, a bat's ArmorClass rating rises from 8 to 4.Habitat Society: While bats are found almost anywhere, theyprefer warm and humid climes. Some species hibernate duringthe cold season and a few are know to migrate. Bats live in caves,dark buildings, or damp crevices, hanging by their toes duringthe day, and leaving at dusk to feed during the night In large,isolated caverns there may be thousands of bats.Ecology: Most bats eat fruit or insects, though some includesmall animals or fish in their diets. The rare vampire bat travelsat night to drink the warm blood of living mammals, bul its vic¬tims are rarely humans or demihumans. Care must be taken notto confuse the vampire bat with the Lrue vampire in this regard.Rot grubs and carrion crawlers are among the few creaturesknown to live in the guano on the floor of large bat-infested ca¬verns, making any expeditions into such caves dangerous Indeed.If the noxious odor from the guano is not enough to subdue thehardiest of adventurers (a single Constitution check to stay con¬scious), these crawling denizens are.These creatures are large versions of the carnivorous variety ofthe ordinary bat with 3-footJong bodies and 5- to 6-foot-longwingspans. They dwell in dark caverns, usually underground,and depend on their sonar in flight to compensate for their pooreyesight. Only 10% of giant bats are of the more powerful l HitDie variety*Extremely maneuverable in flight, large bats gain an ArmorClass bonus of +3 when an opponent with a Dexterity of 13 orless fires a missile weapon at it* The creature must land (usuallyon its victim) to attack with its bite. The typical example of thisspecies inflicts ld2 points of damage with its teeth while the larg¬er does ld4 points of damage. Anyone bitten by a large bat has a1% chance per point of damage done to contract rabies.When rabies is contracted, there is a Id# + 6 day incubationperiod. Once this period has ended, the victim has 10 days tolive. The victim cannot drink or eat anything and is overly irrita¬ble. Anything from loud noises to being awakened at night canset the victim off (the DM determines the temper triggers). If tem¬per flares, the victim must roll a Wisdom check. If the check fails,the rabid person attacks until he is killed or knocked uncon¬scious, When a character contracts rabies, he or she dies from theinfliction, unless cured by a wish, alter reality, limited wish, curedisease, or similar spell*Mobats prefer warm-blooded prey that they bite to death withtheir fangs. They have a dim and evil intelligence that gives thema desire for shiny objects. Because the typical mobat has a wing¬span of 12 to 16 feet, they must have large areas to serve as flightrunways.Because Mobats flight is so rapid and silent, their victims suf¬fers 3 penalty to their surprise rolls. They can also give a pierc¬ing screech that causes such great pain that victims seek to covertheir ears rather than fight, unless a saving throw versus paraly-nation is successful. This screech is always used if the prey resistsand it is effective in a 20-foot radius about the mobat. Note thatmobile mobats have an Armor Class of 2, Under crowded flyingconditions, their Armor Class suffers and raises to 7. When notin Right, mobats have an Armor Class of 10.Azmyths live on flowers, small plants, and insects. They are soli¬tary wanderers, though they do have "favorite haunts' to whichthey return. They often form partnerships with humanoids Formutual benefit, sometimes forming loyal friendships in the proc¬ess, Azmyths have been known to accompany creatures For theirentire lives, and then accompany the creatures' offspring. The lifespan of azmyths are presently unknow n but is believed to be over100 years. They are not familiars as wizards understand the term;no direct control can be exercised over one, except by spells.Azmyths have crested heads and bearded chins, white, pupil¬less eyes, and leathery gray, mauve, or emerald green skin. Theyemit shrill squeaks of alarm or rage, and endearing, liquid chuck¬les of delight or amusement. They communicate by telepathythat has a range of 60 feet and have infra vision to 90 feet. Theycan knom alignment three times per day become mutsib/e (selfonly for six rounds or less, ending when the azmyth makes a suc¬cessful attack) once per day, and create silence 15 1 radius , cen¬tered on themselves, once per dayIn combat, the azmyth bites for 1 point of damage and stabswith its powerful needle-sharp tails For ld2 points. Twice per dayan azmyth can unleash a shocking grasp attack, transmittingIdS+ 6 points of electrical damage through any direct physicalcontact with another creature. This attack can be combined witha physical attack for cumulative damage.This species, know as dragazhar, is named after the adventurerwho first domesticated one, long ago. Nocturnal on the surface,it is active anytime in the gloom of the underworld. It eats carri¬on if it must, but usually hunts small beasts. Desperate dragazharare known to attack livestock, drew, or humans.Night hunters swoop down to bite prey Ud4) P rake with theirwing claws (ld2 each), and slash (Id6) or stab (3d4) with theirdexterous, triangular-shaped, razor sharp tails. They stalk theirprey flying low and dodging behind hillocks, ridges, trees, orstalactites, to attack from ambush. They have infra vision to adistance of 120 feet, but rarely surprise opponents, since theyemit echoing, loon-like screams when excited*Night hunter lairs usually contain over 30 creatures. They typ¬ically live in double-ended caves, or above ground in tall, densewoods. Night hunters do not tarry to eat where they feel endan¬gered, so their lairs often contain treasure fallen from prey car¬ried there* Night hunters roost head-down when sleeping. Theyare velvet in hue. even to their claws, and have violet, orange, orred eves.These mysterious jet-black creatures most closely resemble man¬ta rays. They have no distinct heads and necks, and theirpowerfully-muscled wings do not show the prominent fingerbones common Lo most bats, A natural ability of levitation al¬lows them to hang motionless in midair. This unnerving appear¬ance and behavior has earned them their dark name, but sinistersare not evil, Above ground, they prefer to hunt at night, whentheir 160 -range infravision is most effective. They eat carrion ifno other food is available, and regularly devour flowers and seedpods of all sorts.Sinister* are both resistant to magic and adept in its use. Inaddition to their pinpoint precision levitation, they are sur¬rounded at all times by a naturally-generated 5-foot-deep energyRdd akin to a wall of force. This field affords no protectionagainst spells or melee attacks, but missile attacks are stoppedutterly: normal missiles are turned away, and such effects asmagic missile and Meffs acid arrow are absorbed harmlessly. Inaddition, all sinister* can cast one hold monster (as the spell)once per day. They usually save this for escaping from creaturesmore powerful than themselves, but may use it when hunting* ifravenous*Curiously though they are always silent (communicating onlywith others of its kind via 20-foot-range limited telepathy), sinis¬ter* love music-both vocal and instrumental* Many a bard mak¬ing music at a wilderness campfire has found him or herselfsurrounded by a silent circle of Floating sinisters. Unless they aredirectly attacked, the sinisters will not molest the bard in anyway, but may follow the source of the music, gathering night af¬ter night to form a rather daunting audience,Sinisters are usually encountered in small groups and arethought to have a long life span* Their social habits and matingrituals are unknown.
A rather common omnivorous mammal, bears tend to avoid humans un¬less provoked. Exceptions to this rule can be a most unfortunate occur¬rence.Bears are, in generaJ, large and powerful animals which are foundthroughout the world's temperate and cooler climates. With dense furprotecting them from the elements and powerful daws protecting themfrom other animals, bears are the true rulers of the animal kingdom in theareas where they live.The so-called black bear actually ranges in color from black to light brown.It is smaller than the brown bear and the most widespread species by far.Combat; Although black bears are usually not aggressive, they are ablefighters when pressed. If a black bear scores a paw hit with an IB or betterit also hugs tor 1-8 (2d4) points of additional damage.Habitat.Society; All bears have excellent senses of hearing and smellbut rather poor eyesight. The size shown Is an average for the variety andlarger individuals will, of course, be correspondingly more powerful.One common misconception people hold about bears is that they hi¬bernate during the winter. In fact, they sleep most of the time, but theirmetabolism does not slow down, and they often wake up and leave theirlairs during warm spells.Bears live In small family groups. Female bears are very protective oftheir young, and more than one individual has been badly injured whentaunting or playing with seemingly harmless bear cubs.Ecology- All of these ursoids are omnivorous, although the giganticcave bear tends towards a diet of meat.Bears are fairly intelligent animals that can be trained to perform in avariety of ways, particularly if captured as cubs. Bears can thus be founddancing in circuses or accompanying "mountain men" in the wilderness.The brown bear, of which the infamous grizzly is the most well knownvariety, is a bear of very aggressive disposition. Brown bears are morecarnivorous than their smaller cousins, the black bears. The grizzly inparticular will often bring down large game such as deer and elk.Brown bears are aggressive hunters. If a brown bear scores a paw hitwith a roll of IS or better it will also hug for 2-12 (2d&) points of addi¬tional damage. Brown bears will continue to fight for 1-4 melee roundsafter reaching D to -8 hit points. At-9or fewer hit points, they arc killedimmediately.Cave bears are quite aggressive, willing to attack well-armed partieswithout provocation. If a cave bear scores a paw hit with an 18 or betterit also hugs for 2*16 (2d8) points of additional damage. Cave bears willcontinue to fight for 1-4 melee rounds after reaching 0 to -8 hit points. At-9 or fewer hit points, they are killed immediately.These powerful swimmers feed mostly on marine animals. A paw hit of18 or better indicates a "hug - , which inflicts 3-18 (3d6l points of addition¬al damage. These aggressive animals will Hght for 2-5 rounds after beingbrought Lo 0 to ^12 hit points, but beyond that they will die instantlyGiant beetles are similar to their more ordinary counterparts, butthousands of times larger—with chewing mandibles and hardwings that provide substantial armor protection.Beetles have two pairs of wings and three pairs of legs, fortu¬nately, the wings of a giant beetle cannot be used to fly, and inmost cases, its six bristly legs do not enable it to move as fast as afleeing man* The hard, chitinous shell of several varieties of thesebeetles are brightly colored, and sometimes have value to art col¬lectors. While their shells protect beetles as well as plate mail ar¬mor, it is difficult to craft armor from them, and a skilledalchemist would need to be brought in on the job.AH beetles are basically unintelligent and always hungry. Theywill feed on virtually any form of organic material includingother sorts of beetles. They taste matter with their antennae, orfeelers; if a substance tasted is organic, the beetle grasps it with itsmandibles, crushes it, and eats it. Because of the thorough grind¬ing of the mandibles, nothing eaten by giant beetles can be re¬vived by anything short of a wish. Beetles do not hear or see welland rely primarily on taste and feelExcept as noted below, giant beetles are not really social ani¬mals; those that are found near each other are competitors for thesame biological niche, not part of any family unit.The bombardier beetle is usually found above ground in woodedareas. It primarily feeds on offal and carrion, gathering hugeheaps of the stuff in which to lay its eggs.Combat: If it is attacked or disturbed, there is a 50% chance eachround that it will turn its rear toward its attacker and fire off anSToot, spherical cloud of reeking, reddish, acidic vapor from itsabdomen This cloud causes 3d4 points of damage per round toany creature within range. Furthermore, the sound caused by therelease of the vapor has a 20% chance of stunning any creaturewith a sense of hearing within a iMoot radius, and a like chancefor deafening any creature that was not stunned. Stunning lastsfor 2d4 rounds, plus an additional 2d4 rounds of deafness after¬wards, Deafening lasts 2d6 rounds. The giant bombardier canfire its vapor cloud every third round, but no more than twice ineight hours.Ecology: The bombardier action of this beetle is caused by theexplosive mixture of two substances that are produced internallyand combined in a third organ. If a bombardier is killed before iihas the opportunity to fire off both blasts, it is possible to cut thecreature open and retrieve the chemicals. These chemicals canthen be combined to produce a small explosive, or fire a projec¬tile, with the proper equipment.The chemicals arc also of value to alchemists, who can usethem in various preparations. They are worth 50 gp per dose.Boring beetles ieed on rotting wood and similar organic materialso they are usually found individually inside huge trees ormassed in underground tunnel complexes.Combat: The large mandibles of the boring beetle have a power¬ful bite and will inflict up to 20 points on damage to the victim.Habitat Society: Individually, these creatures are not much moreintelligent than other giant beetles, but it is rumored that nests ofthem can develop a communal intelligence With a level of con¬sciousness and reasoning that approximates the human brain.This does not mean that each beetle has the intelligence of a hu¬man, but rather that, collectively, the entire nest has attained thatlevel In these cases, the beetles are likely to collect treasure andmagical items from their victims,Ecology: In tunnel complexes, boring beetles grow molds, slimes,and fungi for food, beginning their cultures on various forms ofdecaying vegetable and animal matter and wastes.One frequent fungi grown is the shrieker, which serves a dualrole. Not only is the shrieker a tasty treat for the boring beetle,but it also functions as an alarm when visitors have entered thefungi farm. Boring beetles are quick to react to these alarms, dis¬patching the invaders, sometimes eating them, but in any casegaining fresh organic matter on which to raise shrieker and othersaprophytic plants.The smallest of the giant beetles, fire beetles are nevertheless ca¬pable of delivering serious damage with their powerful mandi¬bles, They are found both above and below ground, and areprimarily nocturnal.Combat: Despite its name, the fire beetle has no fire attacks, rely¬ing instead on its huge mandibles to inflict up to three times thedamage of a dagger in a single attack.Ecology: Fire beetles have two special glands above their eyesand one near the back of their abdomens, These glands produce aluminous red glow, and for this reason they are highly prized byminers and adventurers. This luminosity persists for IdG days af¬ter the glands are removed from the beetle, and the light shed willilluminate a radius of 10 feet.The light from these glands is "cold'—it produces no heat.Many mages and alchemists are eager to discover the secret ofthis cold light, which could he not only safe, but economical,with no parts to heat up and bum out. In theory, they say, such alight source could last forever.This uncommon monster inhabits tropical and subtropical jun¬gles, They roam the rain forests searching for fruits and vegeta¬tion, and crushing anything in their path. The horn of a giantrhinoceros beetle extends about 6 feet.Combat: The mandibles of this giant beetle inflict 3d6 points ofdamage on anyone unfortunate enough to be caught by them; thetremendous horn is capable of causing 2d8 points of damage byitself.Ecology: The shell of this jungle dweller is often brightly coloredor iridescent. If retrieved in one piece, these shells are valuable toclerics of the Egyptian pantheon, who use them as giant scarabsto decorate temples and other areas of worship. It is a representa¬tion of this, the largest of all beetles, that serves as the holy sym¬bol for derics of Apshai, the Egyptian god whose sphere ofinfluence is said to include all insects.These woodland beetles are very fond of grains and similar grow¬ing crops, and they sometimes become great nuisances when theyraid cultivated lands.Combat: Like other beetles, they have poor sight and hearing,but they will fight if attacked or attack if they encounter organicmaterial they consider food. The giant stag beetle's two horns areusually not less than 8 feet long; they inflict up to 10 points ofdamage each.Ecology: The worst damage from a stag beetle raid is that done tocrops: they will strip an entire farm in short order. Livestock suf¬fers too, stampeding in fear and wreaking more havoc. The bee¬tles may even devour livestock, if they are hungry enough.The giant water beetle is found only in fresh water no less than 30feet deep.Combat: Voracious eaters, these beetles prey upon virtually anyform of animal but will eat almost anything. Slow and ponder¬ous on land, they move very quickly tn water. Giant water bee¬tles hunt food by scent and by feeling vibrations.Habitat Society: Water beetles sometimes inhabit navigable riv¬ers and lakes, in which case they can cause considerable damageto shipping, often attacking and sinking craft to get at the tastymorsels inside.Ecology: Although they are air breathers, water beetles manageto stay underwater for extended periods of time by catching andholding a bubble of air beneath their giant wings. They will carrythe bubble underwater, where it can be placed in a cave or someother cavity capable of holding an air supply.2-8 {2d4)/2-5 (ld4 +1) or 2-8(2d4)/6 x 1-6Lightning boltThe behir is a snake-like reptilian monster whose dozen legs al¬low it to move with considerable speed and climb at Fully half itsnormal movement rate. It can fold its limbs dose to its long, nar~row body and slither in snake-fashion if it desires. The headlooks more crocodilian than snake-like, but has no difficulty inopening its mouth wide enough to swallow prey whole, the waya snake does.Behir ha ve band-like scales of great hardness. Their color rang¬es from ultramarine to deep blue with bands of gray-brown. Thebelly is pale blue. The two large horns curving back over thehead look dangerous enough but are actually used for preeningthe creature's scales and not for fighting.Combat: A behir will attack its prey by first biting and thenlooping its body around the victim and squeezing. If the latterattack succeeds, the victim is subject to six talon attacks nextround.A behir can discharge a 20-foot long stroke of electrical energyonce every 10 rounds This Jfghfnmg bolt will cause 24 points ofdamage unless a saving throw vs. breath weapon is made. In thelatter case, the target takes only half damage.On a natural attack roll of 20 the behir swallows man-sizedprey whole Any creature swallowed will lose l f*> of ils startingHit Points each round until it dies at the end of the sixth round.The behir will digest its meal in 12 turns, and at that time ihevictim is totally gone and cannot be raised from the dead. Note,however, that a creature swallowed can try to cut its way out ofthe behirs stomach The inner armor class of the behir is 7, buteach round the creature is in the behir it subtracts 1 from thedamage each of its attacks does. This subtraction is cumulative,so on the second melee round there is a -2, on the third a -3, andso on,H a bita t/Society: Behir are solitary creatures, meeting others oftheir kind only to mate and hatch a dutch of 1-4 eggs. The femaleguards these eggs for eight months while the male hunts for thepair. When the young hatch they are immediately turned out ofthe nest to fend for themselves, and the adults separate.Newly hatched behir are about 2 feet long, Behir grow at a rateof 8 feet per year until fully mature. Interestingly enough, newlyhatched behir do not have all of their legs, having instead only sixor eight, Additional pairs of legs grow slowly over time until thecreature has its full complement when it reaches adulthood.Behir range over a territory of about 400 square miles, oftenliving high up a cliff face in a cave.Behir are never friendly with dragonkind, and will never befound coexisting in the same geographical area with any type ofdragon. If a dragon should enter a behir s territory the behir willdo everything it can to drive the dragon out. If the behir fails inthis task, it will move off to find a new home. A behir will neverknowingly enter the territory of a dragon.Ecology: Behir are useful to mages, priests, and alchemists for anumber of concoctions. The horns of a behir can be used to brewthe ink necessary to inscribe a lightning boh scroll, and the sharptalons can likewise be used by a cleric to make the ink for a neu¬tralize poison scroll. The heart of the behir is one of the morecommon ingredients for ink for a protection from poison scroll.As behir sometimes swallow prey whole, there is a 10% chancethat there will be some small items of value inside the monster.More often than not (60%) these will be gems (10 x Q). Other¬wise, there is a 30% chance that there will be from T8 pieces ofjewelry and a 10% chance that a single small magical object of anindegistible nature may be found. Such objects are never foundin a behirs lair, because the creature expels this waste and buriesit elsewhere.The scales are valued for their hardness and color, and areworth up to 500 gp to an armorer who can use them to fashion ahighly ornate set of scale mail armor.
The beholder is the stuff of nightmares. This creature, also called theSphere of many eyes or the eye tyrant. appears as a large orb dominatedby a central eye and a large toothy maw, has 10 smaller eyes on stalkssprouting from the top of the orb. Among adventurers, beholders areknown as deadly adversaries.Equally deadly arc a number of variant creatures known collectively asbeholder-kin, including radical and related creatures, and an undead va¬riety. These creatures are related in manners familial and arcane to the'traditional" beholders, and share a number of features, including thedeadly magical nature ni their eyes. The most extreme of these creaturesare called beholder abominations.The globular body of the beholder and its kin is supported by levita¬tion. allowing it to float slowly about as it wills.Beholders and beholder-kin are usually solitary creatures, but there arereports of large communities of them surviving deep beneath the earthand in the void between the stars, under the dominion of hive mothers.All beholders speak their own language, which is also understood byall beholder-kin. In addition, they often speak the tongues of other lawfulevil creatures.Combat: The beholder has different Armor Classes for different parts oftheir body. When attacking a beholder, determine the location of the at¬tack before striking (as the various Armor Classes may make a strike inone area, and a miss in another):Each of the beholder s eyes, including the central one has a different func¬tion. The standard smaller eyes of a beholder are as follows:10, Death ray (as a death spell with a single target, 40-yard range)The central eye produces an anfi-rntigic ray with a 140-yard range,which covers a 90 degree arc before the creature. No magic (Including theeffects of the other eyes) will function within that area Spells cast in orpassing through that zone cease to function,A beholder may activate the magical powers of its eyes' at will* Gener¬ally, a beholder can use ld4 smaller eyes if attackers are within a 90 de¬gree angle in front, ld6 if attacked from within a 180 degree angle, ld8 ifattacked from a 270 degree arc, and all 10 eyes if attacked from ail sides.The central eye can be used only against attacks from the front. If at¬tacked from above, the beholder can use all of the smaller eyesThe beholder can withstand the loss of its eyestalks. each eyestalksmaller eye having 5-12 hit points. This loss of hit points is over andabove any damage done to the central body. The body can withstand twothirds of the listed hit points in damage before the creature perishes. Theremaining third of the listed hit points are located in the central eye, anddestroying it will eliminate the anti-magic ray, A beholder with 45 hitpoints will have a body that will take 30 points of damage, a central evethat will take 15 points, while one with 75 hit points will have a body thatwill withstand 50 points of damage, and a central eye that takes 25 hilpoints to destroy. Both beholders would have smaller eyestalks/eyes thattake 5-12 Side +4) points of damage to destroy but such damage wouldnot affect the body or central eye. Slaying the body will kill the beholderand render the eyes powerless. Destroyed eyestalks (but not the centraleye) can regenerate at a rate of one lost member per week,Habitat/Soriety: The beholders are a hateful, aggressive and avariciousrace, attacking or dominating other races, including other beholders andmany of the beholder-kin. This is because of a xenophobic intoleranceamong beholders that causes them to hate atl creatures not like them¬selves. The basic, beholder body-type (a sphere with a moulh and a cen¬tral eye, eye-tipped tentacles) allows for a great variety of beholdersubspecies. Some have obvious differences, there are those covered withoverlapping chitin plates, and those with smooth hides, or snake-like eyetentacles, and some with crustacean-Hke joints. But something as small asa change in hide color or size of the central eye can make two groups ofbeholders sworn enemies. Every beholder declares its own unique body-form to be the "true ideal" of beholder hood, the others being nothing butugly copies, fit only to be eliminated.Beholders will normally attack immediately. If confronted with a par¬ticular party there is a 50% chance they will listen to negotiations (brib¬ery) before raining death upon their foes.A hit on a tentacle-mouth inflicts no damage, but stuns the tentacle,causing U to writhe helplessly for 1-4 rounds. If its central eye is de¬stroyed, a bleeder locates beings with in 10 feet by smell and sensing vi¬brations , but it is otherwise unaffected,TenLades must be struck with edged weapons to injure them. They canbe tom free from the victim by a successful bend bars, lift gates roll. Sucha forceful removal does the victim 1-6 damage per tentacle, since thebarbed teeth are violently tom free from the tentacle.If an attached tentacle is damaged but not destroyed, it instantly andautomatically drains sufficient hit points, in blood, from the victimsbody to restore it to a full 6 hit points. This reflex effect occurs after everynon-killing hit on a tentacle, even if it is wounded more than once in around. This cannot occur more than twice in one round. The parasitichealing effect does not respond to damage suffered by the central body orother tentacles,A tentacle continues to drain blood, if it was draining when the centralbody of the death kiss reaches 0 hit points. Tentacles not attached to avictim at that time are incapable of further activity. A death kiss can re¬tract a draining tentacle, but voluntarily does so only when its centralbody is at 5 hit points or less; it willfully detaches once the victim hasbeen drained to 0 hit points.Ingested blood is used to generate electrical energy—I hit point ofblood becomes 1 charge. A death kiss uses this energy for motor activityand healing. An eye of terror expends one charge every two turns in mov¬ing, and thus is almost constantly hunting prey. Spending one charge en¬ables a bleeder to heal 1 hit point of damage to each of its 10 tentacles, itscentral body, and its eye (12 hit points in all). It can heal itself with onecharge of stored energy every other round in addition to its normal at¬tacks and activity.Each tentacle can store up to 24 charges of drained energy' the bodycapable of storing 50 charges of drained energy, A severed tentacle is 70%likely to discharge its cumulative charges, when severed, into anythingtouching it- each charge delivers 1 hit point of electrical damage.Finally, bleeders can ram opponents with their mass. This attack does1-8 damage .A death kiss may 'shut itself down," remaining motionless and insensi¬tive on the ground, and can remain alive in that state for long periods oftime. To awaken from its hibernation, the creature requires an influx ofEcology: The exact reproductive process of the beholder is unknown. Thecore racial hatred of the beholders may derive from the nature of theirreproduction, which seems to produce identical (or nearly so} individualswith only slight margin for variation. Beholders may use parthenogenicreproduction to duplicate themselves, and give birth live (no beholdereggs have been found). Beholders may also (rarely) mate with types ofbeholder-kin.The smaller eyes of the beholder may be used to produce a potion oflevitation, and as such can be sold for 50 gp each.The Death Kiss, or bleeder," is a fearsome predator found in caverns orruins. Its spherical body resembles that of the dreaded beholder, but the"eyestalks" of this creature are bloodsucking tentacles, its "eyes" arehook-toothed orifices. They favor a diet of humans and horses, but willattack anything that has blood. An older name for these creatures is eyeof tenor.The central body of a death kiss has no mouth. Its central eye gives it120-foot infra vision, but the death kiss has no magical powers. A deathkiss is 90% likely to be taken for a beholder when sighted. The 10 tenta¬cles largely retract into the body when not needed, resembling eyestalks,but can lash out to a full 20-foot stretch with blinding speed, The tenta¬cles may act separately or in concert, attacking a single creature or anentire adventuring company.A tentacles initial strike does 1-8 points of damage as the barb-mouthed tip attaches to the victim. Each attached tentacle drains 2 hitpoints worth of blood per round, beginning the round after it hits.Like the beholder, the death kiss has variable Armor Classes, in ordi¬nary combat, use the following table, though situations may dictate othermethods (should the creature be attacking with a tentacle from 20 feetaway, then no attack on the body or central eye may be made, whileattacks on the stalk and mouth are still possible),
electrical energy, considerable heal* or the internal shock caused by ablow, fall wound, or magical attack; any of the above stimulants mustdeal at least 5 points of damage to the death kiss to awaken it , Adventur¬ers finding a hibernating death kiss usually provide such stimulation,thinking the sleeper helpless prey.Eyes of terror are solitary hunters, fully inheriting the paranoia andego of their cousins, the beholders. If they encounter one of their kin, theresult is often a mid-air struggle to the death. The loser's body becomes anincubator and breeding ground for the death kiss' offspring. Within oneday. 1-4 young will "hatch"". Each new bleeder has half its parents hitpoints, and fully matures in 1 month.The death kiss has an organ in the central, upper body that is a valuedingredient in magical potions and spell inks concerned with levitation(and may be sold like beholder eyes}. In addition, a brain or nerve node,deep in a bleeder's body hardens into a soft-sided, faceted red gem uponthe creatures death Called bloodeyes these typically fetch a marketprice of 70 gp each. They are valued for adornments since they glow morebrightly as the wearer s emotions intensify.This is a water breathing version of the beholder, and dwells only at greatdepths, floating slowly about, stalking prey, They have two crab-Hkepincers which inflict 2-8 I2d41 points of damage each, and a wide mouthfull of sharp teeth that does 1-6 points of damage.The primary weapons of the eyes of the deep, however,, are their eyes.The creatures large central eye emits a cone of blinding lig/i f 5 feet wide atits start, 30 feet long, and 20 feet wide at its base. Those in the cone mustsave vs. poison or be stunned for 2-8 (2d4J rounds.The eye of the deep also has two smaller eyes on long stalks, and usesboth to create illusion. Acting independently, the small eyes are able tocast hold person and hold monster spells respectively,The eye of the deep has an Armor Class of 5 everywhere, including itseyes and eye stalks. If Us eyestalks are severed they will grow back inabout a week.The Gauth is a relative of the beholder that feeds on magic. Its sphericalbody is 5 feet in diameter and brown in color, mottled with purple andgray. Located in the center of the gauth s forward hemisphere is a largecentral eye surrounded by a ring of smaller eyes that are protected byridges of tough flesh. These secondary body eyes provide the creaturewith normal vision in lighted areas and infravision to 90 feet. On the un¬derside is the beast's fearsome mouth with its accompanying cluster ofFour feeding tendrils, while the top is adorned with a crown of six eyestalks. Attacks on the creature hit as follows;While the gauth is similar to the beholder, its ability to feed on theenergy of magical objects makes it even more dangerous in some ways.When a gauth moves into combat, it begins to glow, much as If it werethe object of a faerie fire spell, to attract the attention of its foes. A crea¬ture that meets the gaze of the central eye must roll a successful savingthrow vs. spelt* with a ^2 penalty, or be affected as if the victim of afeeblemind spell.If a gauth chooses to bite with its great maw, the sharp fangs inflict 3d4points of damage. The four tendrils around the mouth can grab and holdvictims as if they had a Strength of 18, but they can inflict no damage.A gauth in combat can also employ its six eye stalks. These eyes havethe following powers:2. Repulsion (as spell, 10-foot wide path, 40-foot range!3. Cone of cold (as spel I, inflicts 3d4 points of damage and has an area ofeffect 5 feet wide at the start, 50 feet long, and 20 feet wide at the base;this eye can be used only three times per day)4. Lightning holt i as spell inflicts 4d4 damage with SO' range: this powercart be used up to four times per day)5. Paralyzation (as wand. 40-foot range, single target: only a dispel mag¬ic or the beholder s death can tree the victim)Perhaps the most feared of the gauth's powers, its dweeuner drain, per¬mits the gauth to drain charges from magical items. It has a 40-foot rangeand can be targeted or one individual per round. In addition to prevent¬ing one object from functioning for the duration of that round, thispower drains one charge from one charged object. Permanent objects,such as magical swords, are rendered powerless for one round by thisability. Artifacts are not affected by the dweomer drain. The eye has noeffect on spells that have been memorised (but not yet cast) and it will notbreak the concentration of a wizard. It does neutralize any spell cast byits target that round, however.A dispel magic spell cast on any of the gauth's eye stalks prevents itsuse for Id4 rounds. The central eye, any fully retracted eye stalks, thebody's ability to glow, and the gauth’s natural levitation are not subjectto injury by such a spell.If a gauth is slain, its magical energy dissipates. Usually, this is a harm-less event, but there is a 2% chance that it is catastrophic* inflicting 4d4points of damage to all creatures within 10 feet (no saving throw), Gauthare immune to their own powers and to those of other gauth. They havean unusual physiology that enables them to regenerate 1 hit point everytwo turns.Although gauth are not known to fight over territories or prey, they dogo to great lengths to avoid each other. Even when they encounter an¬other of their kind in the wilderness, they often ignore them utterly*A gauth can survive by eating meat but it greatly prefers to devourmagical objects. In some unknown manner, the creature is able to absorbmagical energy and feed on it- Each turn that an object spends in thegauth's stomach causes it to lose one charge. A permanent object is ren¬dered inoperative after one day {artifacts are not affected, nor do theyprovide sustenance). Magical objects that cannot be entirely digested by agauth are spat out after they have been drained of all their power.Gauth are thought to live a century or so. Within a week of their "natu¬ral" death, two young gauth emerge from the corpse. Although smallerthan their parent (each has 2 +2 or 3 +3 HD and a bite that causes only2d4 points of damage), they have all the powers oF a full-grown adult.Another relative of the beholder, the spectator is a guardian of places andtreasures, and capable of limited planar travel Once it is given a task* thespectator will watch for up to 101 years. It will allow no one to use, bor¬row, or examine an item or treasure, except the one who gave it its or¬ders, The spectator has a large central eye and four smaller eye stalksprotruding from the top of its hovering, spherical body.The spectator is difficult to surprise, and has a +2 surprise modifierand a +1 initiative modifier. It is basically a passive creature* and willattempt to communicate and implant suggestion as its first act* unless it isimmediately attacked. Striking a spectator has the following effects;A spectator, if blinded in all of its eyes, cannot defend its treasure andwill teleport to the outer plane of Nirvana. This is the only conditionunder which it will leave Us post. Its eyes regenerate in one day and thenit returns, If the treasure is gone* the creature again leaves for Nirvana,never to return.Spectator has a general magic resistance of 5%. As long as the centraleye Is undamaged, it can also reflect one spell cast at it, per round, send¬ing it back against the caster. This does not apply to spells whose range istouch. Reflection occurs only if the spectator rolls a successful savingthrow vs, spell, [f the saving throw fails, magic resistance (and a furthersaving throw) must be rolled. Reflection is possible only if the caster isstanding within the 60 degree arc of the central eye. Only the spellcaster isaffected by a reflected spell.All of the smaller eyes may be used at the same time against the sametarget, Their powers are:1. Create food and water (creates the amount of food and water for alarge meal for up to six people; this takes one full round)2- Cause serious wounds (inflicts 2d8+3 points of damage to a singlebeing at a range of 60 yards; a saving throw vs, spell is allowed for halfdamage)3. Partdyzafiou ray (range 90 feet, one target only, for 8d4 rounds).4. Telepathy (range 120 feet, only one target: communication bpossiblein this way* and the beast can also plant a suggestion if the target fails asaving throw vs, spells the suggestion is always to leave in peace).If properly met, the spectator can be quite friendly. It will tell a partyexactly what it is guarding early in any conversation. If Its charge is notthreatened, it can be very amiable and talkative, using its telepathy.Spectators move by a very rapid levitation, in any direction. They wi11drift aimlessly when asleep (20% likely when encountered), never touch¬ing the ground.The treasure being guarded is 90% likely to be a magical item. If thespectator gains incidental treasure while performing its duty, this is notpart of its charge and it will freely aJlow it to be taken. Incidental treasurecan be generated as follows: 40% for 3-300 coins of mixed types. 30% forI d6 gems of 50 gp base value, 20 % for Id4 potions, 15 % for a +1 piece ofarmor, 15% for a +1 weapon* and 5% for a miscellaneous magical itemvalued at 1,000 XP or less,Spectators are summoned from Nirvana by casting monster summon¬ing V with material components of three or more small eyes from a be¬holder. (The chance of success is 10% per eye.) The spectator can becommanded only io guard some treasure. It performs no other duty, andif commanded to undertake some other task it returns to Nirvana imme¬diately, If its guarded treasure is ever destroyed or stolen, the spectator isreleased from service and returns to Nirvana. The summoner may takethe item with no interference from the spectator, but this releases thecreature.Death tyrants are rotting, mold-encrusted beholders. They may be shriv¬eled, wounds exposing their internal, spherical networks oF circular ribs,among the remnants of their exoskeleta! plates. All sport wounds, somehave eyestalks missing, or a milky film covering their eyes. They moveand turn more slowly than living beholders, striking and bringing theireyes to bear last in any combat round.An undead beholder can use all the powers of its surviving eyes, just asit did in life. The powers of 2-5 eyes (select randomly, including the cen¬tral eye) are lost due to injuries or death, and the change to undeath.Although a death tyrant heals'' its motive energies through time, it can¬not regenerate lost eyestalks or their powers.Charm powers are lost in undeath. The two eyes that charmed eitherbecome useless (60%). or function as weak ho/d monster effects (40%), Abeing failing to save against such a hold remains held as long as the eye'sgaze remains steadily focused on them. If the eye is turned on anotherbeing, or the victim hooded, or forcibly removed, the hold lasts another1-3 rounds. Death tyrants are immune to steep, charm and hold spells.If not controlled by another creature through magic, a death tyranthangs motionless until its creator's instructions are fulfilled (for example,Attack all humans who enter this chamber until they are destroyed orflee. Do not leave the chamber, ). If no instructions are given to a new"death tyrant, it attacks all living things it perceives. Death tyrants occurspontaneously in very rare instances. In most cases, they are createdthrough the magic of evil beings—from human mages to illithid villains.Some outcast, magic-using beholders have even been known to createdeath tyrants from their own unfortunate brethren.Death tyrants have no self-awareness or social interaction; they aremindless servants of more powerful masters. Mindless” is a relativeterm; the once highly intelligent brains of death tyrants still use eyes skill¬fully to perceive and attack nearby foes, When a death tyrant is con¬trolled by another being, consider it to have the intelligence of itscontrollerDeath tyrants are created Irom dying beholders. A spell, thought tohave been developed by human mages in the remote past, forces a be¬holder from a living to an undead state, and imprints its brain with in¬structions. "Rogue death tyrants also exist; those whose instructionsspecifically enable them to ignore all controlling attempts. These are im¬mune to the control attempts of all other beings, Beholders often leaveLhem as traps against rivals.Human spell researchers report that control ot a death tyrant is verydifficult. A beholder's mind fluctuates wildly in the frequency and level ofits mental activity scrambling normal diflmj monster and control wn-deact spells. A special spell must be devised to command a death tyrant.Most beholders make saving throws according to their Hit Dice. TheDeath Kiss makes saving throws as a lOth-Jevei warrior. The typical be¬holder and undead beholders make saving throws as follows:
The legendary hive mothers are also called the "Ultimate tyrants ', or just“Ultinrales . They are twice the size of typical beholders, and differ inappearance as wellTheir mouths are larger, so large that they can gulp down a man-sizedtarget on a natural die roll of 20. Once swallowed, the prey takes 5-20points of damage (5d4) each round unt il it is dead or escapes. The behold¬ers mouth is not very deep, so a victim can escape by making a successfulattack roll.The ultimate has no evestalks. but its magical eyes are protected byhooded covers in the flesh of the creatures body, so that they cannot besevered. The central eye has 15 hit points.The ultimate s true ability is in controlling the actions of large numbersof beholders and beholder-kin. A hive mother may have 5-10 ordinarybeholders under its command, or 5-20 abomination beholder-kin (see be¬low), which It communicates with teiepathically. A nesting hive motherspells disaster for the surrounding region, as it can apparently create acommunity of beholders, beholder-kin, and abominations, tt destroyed,the beholders and beholder-kin will fum on each other, or seek their ownlairs.Hive mothers may be the ancestral stock of the better known beholder,the next step of its evolution, a magical mutation, or a separate species.The reality remains unknown.Directors are a social, warrior-beholder, and breed specialized mounts,They mindlink with their mounts to better control them.Directors resemble beholders, but their central eye is smaller. Theypossess only six small eyes on retractable eye stalks. Directors have afanged mouth below the central eye and possesses three clawed, sensorytendrils on their ventral surface. These tendrils are used to ding to themount and link with its limited mind.A directors central eye has the power of deflection —all frontal attackson director suffer a -2 penalty to the attack roll and damage is halved,The director also gains a +2 bonus to all saving throw's against spells castby those in the field of vision of the central eye.Director mounts seem to have derived from an insect stock, as they arecovered in chitin and have simple eye spots and multiple limbs.Directors normally possess 8 Hit Dice, but when mounted the directorand mount are treated as a single creature whose Hit Dice equals the sumof those of the director and the mount. Alter a director mount suffershalf damage, the mount's speed is reduced to half and the director getsonly one physical attack per round. A director may flee and leave hismount to tend for itself (the mount suffers a “4 penalty to its attackrolls). Directors have an AC of 4, but are AC 2 when mounted. Directorsmay use all of their normal powers while mounted, within the restrictionsof beholder targeting angles,Crawler (a typical mount): A crawler resembles a cross between a cen¬tipede and a spider. It has 4 Hit Dice. It has 10 legs, two pairs of frontalantennae, and two fighting spider fangs that can be used for separatestabbing attacks causing 2d4 points of damage each. Victims who fail toroll successful saving throws vs. poison are paralyzed for ld4 rounds.Crawlers are omnivores that prefer to eat smaller creatures. Unmounted,they may roll into a ball to gain an AC of 0. They have cutting mandiblesbeneath their front fangs,An examiner is a 4-foot diameter sphere with no central eye and only foursmall eyes, each at the end of an antenna, mounted atop the sphere. Theyhave one smalt, lamprey-like mouth on their ventral surface. The mouthis surrounded by four multHointed limbs ending in gripper pads. Theselimbs can pick up and manipulate tools, the chief strength of the exam¬iner.Examiners are scholars and clerks involved in spell and magical itemenhancement, research, and creation. They can use any artifact or tool aswell as humans, and they can wield up to four items at a time. Examinersregenerate 1 point of damage each round, The powers of their four eyesare given below (all speil-like effects are cast al the Sth level),3, Transmute Farm (similar to a Stone Shape spell, but works on all typesof nonmagical, nonliving material)Examiners are not the bravest of beholder-kin, but they are potentiallythe most dangerous with their command of artifacts. They are often thelackeys of beholders, overseers, and hive mothers.A lensman has one eye set in the chest of its five-limbed, starfish-shaped,simian body. Beneath the eye is a leering, toothy maw Four of the fivelimbs end in three-fingered, two-thumbed, clawed hands. The fifth limb,atop the body, is a prehensile, whip-1 ike tentacle. Its chi tin is soft andthere are many short, fly-like hairs. Lensmen are the only kin to wear anysort of garb—a webbing that is used to hold tools and weapons. Theirpreferred weapons are double-headed pole arms,Lensmen are semi-mindless drones that don’t question Ihdr lot in life.The eye oi each lensman possesses only one of the following six specialpowers tall at the 6th level of ability).6, Protections {as scrolls, any type, but only one at a time)Overseers resemble fleshy trees. They have 13 limbs, each of which endsin a bud that conceals an eye: one of these limbs forms the top spine, andthree yammering mouths surround the spine. There are eight thorny,vine-like limbs that arc used to grasp tools and for physical defense, in¬flicting IdlO *2 points of damage each. Overseers sit on root-like basesand can inch along when movement is required. They cannot levitate,Overseers are covered with a fungus which changes color as the over¬seers desire, commonly mottled green, gray, and brownOverseers may use any physical weapons or artifacts. The powers oftheir 13 eyes are as follows (all magical effects are cast at 14th level).5 Telekinesis 250 lb. weight6, Emotion7\ Muss Charm8. DominationQ. Mrtss SuggestionAn overseers AC is 2. but each eye stalk is AC 7 and is severed if itsuffers 10 points of damage.Like hive mothers (that operate with them), overseers can convincesimilar beholders and beholder-kin to work together. Overseers are veryprotective of their health and always have one or two beholder guardsand at least a halt dozen directors protecting their welfare.Wat chefs are 6-foot-diameter spheres with three central eyes arrangedaround the circumference of the sphere. These eyes are huge and un-liddcd, On the crown of the sphere is a compound eye and a ring of sixeye spots that make it difficult to surprise a watcher, A large tentacle witha barbed prehensile pad extends from the ventral surface, right behind thesmall mouth with its raspdike tongue. Watchers feed on carrion andstunned prey. They are information gatherers and are the least brave ofall the eye tyrant races.Watchers can attack with their single tentacle for 3d6 points of damage.The tentacle also inflicts an electrical shock; victims who fail a systemshock roll fall unconscious.Each of a watchers main, eyes ha^ two powers, and the compound eyeon top may draw on three different abilities. The six eye spots have nospecial powers.3. 7Wrfrme5ti 1,000 lb, and TefeporfCompound Eye: Message. Tongues, and SuggestionWatchers are not aggressive warriors; they prefer misdirection andflight to actual confrontation.The beholder races are no! limited to the ones presented here. The plasticnature of the beholder race allows many mutations and abominations inthe breed, including, but not limited to, the following.Shunned by other beholders, this is a beholder which has purposelyblinded its central eye, so that it might cast spells. It does so by channel¬ing spell energy through an eyestalk, replacing the normal effect with thatof a spell of its choice.These are extremely ancient beholders of godlike intelligence and power.Though they have lost the function of some of their eyestalks, they havemore hit points and are able to cast spells. They can supposedly createand control death tyrants,This is a stunted, pale-white beholder retaining only its anti-magic eyeand reputed to have great magical ability.This ghost-like undead beholder is created by magical explosions.An undead beholder, it passes cm the rotting disease which killed it.This abomination is a great baulder-jike beholder-kin without eyes.GorbetThe gorbel is a wild, clawed beholder-kin lacking magic but with the nas¬ty habit of exploding if attacked.In addition, there are beholders which are in all appearances normal ’but have eyes with alternate magical abilities, such as a detect he insteadoi a death ray. Such creatures are usually treated as outcasts by all thebeholder and beholder-kin races.
cal or mundane in nature, are among the most in- ever.t cresting creatures ever to evolve. Their unique physiology sets themapart from alt other life, and their grace and beauty have earned them aplace of respect and adoration in the tales of many races.Blood hawk hunt in Hocks and are fond of humanoids They continue toattack humans even if the melee has gone against them, Male bloodhawks kill humans not only for food but also for gems, which they use toline their nests as an allurement to females.Giant eagles have exceptional eyesight and hearing and cannot be sur¬prised except at night or in their lair, and then only 10% of the time. Farmore social than normal eagles, up to 20 nests can be found in the samearea, one nest for each mated pair. Giant eagles can be trained and theireggs sell for 500 to 50 0 gp.Their bodies look like those of storks, with grey, tan, or off-white plum¬age on their bodies and sleek black necks. Their heads are narrow andThe boobrie, giant relative of the stork, stands 12 feet talk A boobriesdiet consists of giant catfish and other wetland denizens. When times arelean, the boobrie feeds on snakes, lizards, and giant spiders. Its occasion¬al dependence on a diet of creatures that deliver a toxic bite has made theboobrie immune to all poisons. When a boobrie hunts, it finds a grove oftall marsh grass or similar vegetation and slips into it. Once in its huntingblind, it remains still for hours at a time, until prey comes within sight.When employing this means of ambush, its opponents suffer a “3 penal¬ty to their surprise rolls.Condors measure three to six feet and have a wingspan of 13 to 20 feet.They rarely land except Ip feed—they even sleep in flight. Condor eggsand hatchlings are worth 30-60 gp. They can be trained to act as spottersor retrievers. Humanoids of small or tiny size can train them as aerialmounts. Used in this way, they can carry 60 pounds, either held in theirclaws or riding atop their backs.An eagle typically attacks from great heights, letting gravity hurtle it to¬ward its prey. If an eagle dives more than 100 feet, its diving speed isdouble its normal flying speed and the eagle is restricted to attacking withits daws. These high-speed attacks gain a +2 attack bonus and doubledamage. Eagles are never surprised because of their exceptional eyesightand hearing. Eagles mate for life and, since they nest in one spot, it is easyto identify places where eagles are normally present. On occasion, in anarea of rich feeding, l dS + 4 eagles are encountered instead of the normalindividual or pair Eagles generally hunt rodents, fish, and olher smallanimals. Eagles also Feed on the carrion of recently killed creatures aswell. Eagles never attack humanoids, though small creatures like brown¬ies have to be wary of a hunting eagle.end in long, glossy-black, needle-1 ike beaks Eblis speak a language ofchirps, whistles, and deep-throated hoots. In addition, spellcasting eblishave managed to learn a rudimentary version of common, allowing ihemto converse with those they encounter. Each community is led by oneindividual with spellcasting ability. These eblis cast 2d4 spells per day as3rd-level casters. To determine the available spells, roll IdS and consultthe following table. Duplicate rolls indicate the spell may be employedmore than once per day.Eblis love shiny objects (like gems); even the most wise and powerful ofthe eblis can be bribed with an impressive jewel. An eblis communityconsists of 2d4 huts built from straw and grasses common to the marsharound the community. Care is taken by the eblis Lo make these huts diffi¬cult to detect. In fad, only a determined search of the area by a ranger orsomeone with the animal lore proficiency is likely to uncover the commu¬nity.All eblis secrete an oil that coats their feathers and provides them witha + 1 bonus lo all saving throws against fire- and flame-based attacksAny damage caused by a fire- or flame-based attack is lessened by -1 foreach die of damage.The evil nature of the eblis is best seen in the delight it takes in huntingand killing. When an eblis spots travelers who have objects it desires forits nest, it attacks. Since the eblte Is cunning, these attacks often take theforms of ambushes.Falcons are smaller, swifter and more maneuverable than hawks. Thesebirds of prey are easily trained and are preferred by hunters over hawks.Trained falcons sell for around 1.000 gp each.Giant eagles stand 10 feet tall and have wing spans of up to 20 feet. Theyshare the coloration and fighting methods of their smaller cousins, How-These avian? are typified by the ostrich, emu. and rhea. Although theyshare many of the physiological adaptations that enable other birds totake wing and break the bonds of earth, they are unable to fly,The ostrich is the largest and strongest, standing 8 feet tall and weigh¬ing 300 pounds. The animal's small head and short, flat beak are perchedatop a long, featherless neck The ostrich fans is able to run at 40 milesper hour. If forced to fight, an ostrich uses its legs to deliver a kick thatinflicts Ids points of damage.The emu reaches b feet high and 130 pounds. Unlike those of their larg¬er cousins, the wings of an emu are rudimentary appendages hidden be¬neath their coarse, hair-like feathers.The rhea resembles a small ostrich, standing 3 feet tall and weighs 80pounds, The differences between the I wo species lie in the structure of thefeet and the tall feathers* Ostriches have two toes* while rheas have three,and ostriches have elegant, flowing tail plumes* while (he rheas are farshorter. Long leathers on the bird s sides swoop down to cover the stunt¬ed tail feathers.Hawks have wingspans up to 5 feet. They attack in plummeting dives,usually from a height of 200 feel or more. This dive gives them a +2attack bonus, enabling their talons to inflict double damage. Hawks can¬not attack with their beaks during the round in which they use a diveattack. After the initial dive, hawks fight by biting and pecking with theirbeaks, tearing at their opponents with their talons. Hawks target eyesand they have a 25% probability of striking an eye whenever its beakstrikes Opponents struck in the eye are blinded for ldlO rounds and havea 10% chance of losing the use of the eye. Because of their superior eye¬sight. hawks can never be surprised. Any intruder threatening the nest isattacked, regardless ot stee, If taken young and trained by an expert,hawks can be taught to hunt. Fledglings bring 500 gp and trained hawkssell for as much as 1,200 gp.Owls hunt rodents* small lizards and insects, attacking humans only whenfrightened lor magically commanded r They have 120' in fra vision and quad¬ruple normal hearing. They fly in total silence, giving their prey 4 ”b penaltyto their surprise rolls. Owls cannot be surprised during hours of dusk anddarkness: during daylight hours, their eye sight is worse than that of humans,suffering a ”3 on their surprise roll if discovered in their daylight roostingplace. Owls attack with sharp talons and hooked beaks. If they swoop from aheight of 50 feet or more, each attack is +2 and inflicts double damage, butno beak attack is possibleThese nocturnal creatures inhabit very wild areas, preying on rodentslarge game birds, and rabbits They are too large to gain swoop bonusesbut can fly in nearly perfect silence; opponents suffer a -6 on their sur¬prise roll. Giant owls may be friendly toward humans, though they arenaturally suspicious. Parents will fight anything that threatens theiryoung. Eggs sell for 1 000 sp and hatchlings sell for 2*000 sp.Talking owls appear as ordinary owls* but speak common and six otherlanguages (PM's option), Their role is to serve and advise champions ofgood causes on dangerous quests, which they do for ld3 weeks If treatedkindly on the first encounter: a talking owl feigns a broken wing to seehow a party will react. Talking owls can detect good. They have a wis¬dom score of 21 with the appropriate spell immunities.Ravens and crows are often mistaken as bad omens by superstitiousfarmers and peasants. They attack with strong claws and their long,sharp beaks. Ravens employ a grab and peck approach to combat. Thesebirds are 10% likely to attack an opponent's eyes, If successful, the attackcauses the opponent to lose an eye. All birds of this type travel in flocks.Any encountered solo are actually scouts. As soon as they see any ap¬proaching creature, the scouts give warning cries and maintain a safe dis¬tance to keep track of them, Because of the scouts* ravens cannot besurprised during daylight conditions.Giant ravens are both pugnacious and easily trained (if raised from fledg¬lings}* and are often used as guards and messengers. While they are toosmall to be used as mounts by all but small humanoids (he** faerie folkand PCs under the effects of a potion of diminution}, the strength of thesebirds is enough to carry an adult halfliftg*Huge ravens have malicious dispositions, occasionally serving evil mas¬ters, Mot all raven familiars and consorts are evil—the alignment of themaster is a decisive factor in such arrangements.These aquatic birds tend to inhabit areas frequented by similar water-fowl. Such areas include rivers* ponds* Jakes* and marshes. Swans possesacute senses. They are 90% likely to detect intruders. There is a 10%chance that any swan encounter includes one ur more swanmays (q.v J inavian form,Vullures are sca vengers that search the skies for injured or dead creaturesto feed upon. They measure 2 to 3 feet long with a wingspan of up to 7feet* Greasy blue-black feathers cover the torso and wings; its pink headis bald. Vultures are cowards, and will wait until an untended meal stopsmoving. If six or more vultures are present, they may attack a weaklymoving victim. If the victim defends itself, the vultures move out of reachbut maintain their death watch, Creatures that are unconscious, dead, ormagically sleeping or held are potential meals. If the surviving combat^ants are further than 20 feet from the fallen creatures* the vultures alightand begin feeding- Because of their diet, vultures kin have developed anatural resistance to disease and organic toxins.Giant vultures measure 3 to 5 feet. Domesticated giant vultures can betrained to associate specific species (i.e*. as humanoids) with food, hencethe birds concentrate on locating those creatures. Giant vulture eggs andhatchlings are worth 30-00 gp.
These small, furry animals are nearly blind, and look like normalmoles. Brain moles are seldom seen, however, They live in un¬derground tunnels, burrowing through rock as easily as throughdirt. Usually, the only discernible evidence of a brain moles pres¬ence is a network of blistered stone or mounded dirt aboveground, which marks the tunnel complex. These creatures dam¬age more than landscapes, however. Brain moles feed on psionicactivity. From the protection of their tunnels, they will psionicaLly burrow into a victim s brain, and drain his psionic energy.Combat; A brain mole commonly attacks its victim in forests orunderground: in either case, the creature is usually out of its di¬rect line of sight- The mole waits for a psionically endowed beingto appear above it. or tt will burrow in search of prey.Brain moles have an innate psionic sense and can automati¬cally detect any psionic activity within 200 yards. However, theycan only feed on psionic energy when their victim is nearby:within 30 yards if the victim is a psionidst or psionic creature. 30feet if the victim Is a wild talent. The mole can't get a fix on itsprey until the victim actually uses a psionic power.Once a brain mole locates a victim it will attempt to establishcontact. If contact is made, U will attempt to feed. If the victim isa wild talent, feeding is accomplished by using mind wipe. If thevictim is a psionidst (or psionic creature), feeding is accom¬plished through amplification.A brain mole does not attack maliciously It must feed at leastonce a week or it will die.Telepathy - Sciences: mindlink. mindwipe: Devotions: contact,mind thrustMetapsiunks - Devotions; psychic drain (no cost), psionic senseA brain mole can perform mindwipe up to a range of 30 feet.Strangely enough, a brain mole must establish contact before us¬ing psychic drain. Furthermore, it can only perform psychicdrain upon psionirists or psionic creatures. However, it does nothave to put them into a trance or a deep sleep first, it just startssiphoning away psionic energyHabitat Society: Brain moles live in family units that include onemale, one female, and ld6 young (one of which may be oldenough to feed by itself). Large brain mole towns of up to 3d6family units have been reported. Of course, these only occur inplaces frequently traveled by the psionically empowered.Ecology: Though brain moles can be dangerous to some, otherskeep them as pets. The moles are rather friendly, and easilytamed. They are favored by royalty who enjoy the special pro¬tection which only brain moles can provide. Some sages claimthat even a dead brain mole can otter protection from psionicattacks, provided the carcass is worn about one's neck as a me¬dallion, Sometimes, nobles who have been harassed by a particu¬lar psionidst will send heroes out on quests for the little furryrodents.On the open market, adult brain moles sell for 50 gp. Young¬sters sell tor 5 gp each.
Broken ones (or animal men I are the tragic survivors of scientificand magical experiments gone awry. While they were once hu¬man their beings have become mingled with those of animalsand their very nature has been forever altered by the shock of thisevent* It is rumored that some broken ones are the result of tailedattempts at resurrection, reincarnation, or polymorph spells.While broken ones look more or less human, they are physi¬cally warped and twisted by the accidents that made them. Thecharacteristics of their non-human part will be clearly visible toany who see them. For example, a broken one who has been in¬fused with the essence of a rat might have horrific feral featureswiry whiskers, curling clawed fingers, and a long, whip-like tailBroken ones know whatever languages they knew as humanbeings and 10% of them can communicate with their non-humankin as well. If is not uncommon for the speech of a broken one tobe heavily accented or slurred by the deformities of its body.Combat: Broken ones tend to be reclusive creatures and combatwith them is rare. Still, they are strong opponents. Broken onesare almost always blessed with a greater than human stamina,reflected Ln the fact that they always have at least 5 hit points perHit Die. Thus, the weakest of broken ones has at least 15 hitpoints. In addition, broken ones heal at a greatly acceleratedrate, regenerating 1 hit point each round.A broken one will often wield weapons in combat, inflictingdamage according to the weapon used. Many broken ones havealso developed daws or great strength, which makes them deadlyin unarmed combat. Hence, all such creatures inflict ld6 pointsof damage in melee. Unusually strong strains might receive bo¬nuses to attack and damage rolls.Many broken ones have other abilities (night vision, keenhearing, etc.) that are derived from their animal half. As a gen¬eral rule, each creature wdj have a single ability of this sort*Habitat Society: Broken ones tend to gather together in bands ofbetween 10 and 60 persons. Since they seldom find acceptance inhuman societies, they seek out their own kind and dwell in se¬cluded areas of dense woods or rocky wastes Far from the homesof men. From time to time they will attack a human village orcaravan, either for supplies, in self-defense, or simply out ofvengeance for real or imagined wrongs* If possible, they will tryto seek out their creator and destroy him for the transformationshe has brought upon them.When a society of these monsters is found, it will always betribal in nature. There will be from 10-60 typical broken oneswith one greater broken one for every 10 individuals. The greaterbroken ones (described below) will act as leaders and often haveabsolute power over their subjects.Ecology: Broken ones are unnatural combinations of men andanimals. Their individual diets and habits are largely dictated bytheir animal natures* Thus, a broken one who has leonine char¬acteristics would be carnivorous, while one infused with the es¬sence of a horse would be vegetarian. There are no knownexamples of a broken one who has been formed with the essenceof an intelligent nonhuman creature.Broken ones do manufacture the items they need to survive.These are seldom of exceptional quality, however, and are of lit¬tle or no interest to outsiders. Occasionally, broken ones may becaptured by evil wizards or sages who wish to study them.From time to time, some animal men emerge who are physi¬cally superior* While they are still horrible to look upon and can¬not dwell among men, they are deadly figures with keen mindsand powerful bodies. Their twisted and broken souls, however,often lead them to acts of violence against normal men .These creatures regenerate at twice the rate of their peers (2 hitpoints per round) and inflict Idfi points of damage in unarmedcombat. When using weapons, they gain a +3 to +5 bonus onall attack and damage rolls* Like their subjects, they often havespecial abilities based on their animal natures. Such powers,however, are often more numerous (from 1-4 abilities) and maybe even better than those of the animal they are drawn from. Forexample, a greater broken one who is created from scorpionstock might have a ckitinous shell that gives it AC 2 and it mighthave a poisonous stinger.Brownies are small, benign humanoids who may be very distant¬ly related to halflings. Peaceful and friendly brownies live in pas¬toral regions, foraging and gleaning their food.Standing no taller than 2 feet, brownies are exceedingly nim¬ble, They resemble small elves with brown hair and bright blueeyes. Their brightly colored garments are made from wool or lin¬en with gold ornamentation. They normally carry leatherpouches and tools for repairing leather, wood, and metal.Brownies speak their own language and those of elves, pixies,sprites, and halflings, as well as common.Combat: Brownies prefer not to engage in combat, and only doso if threatened, Angry brownies rarely meet their foes in hand tohand combat, relying instead on magic.Since their senses are so keen, it is impossible to surprisebrownies. They are superb at blending into their surroundingsand can become all but invisible when they choose, This, com¬bined with their great agility, gives them an AC of 3.Brownies use spells to harass and drive away enemies. Theycan use the following spells, once per day: protection from evil,ventriloquism . dancing lights, continual light mirror image (3images), confusion, and dimension door . If cornered and unableto employ any spells, brownies attack with short swords.Habitat Society: Brownies live in rural areas, making theirhomes in small burrows or abandoned buildings. They often liveclose to or on farms, as they are fascinated by farm life.Brownies live by harvesting wild fruits and gleaning grainfrom a farmer's field. Being honest to the core, a brownie alwaysperforms some service in exchange for what is taken. One mightmilk a farmers cows and take only a small amount.Some brownies go so far as to become house brownies. Theyobserve the families in a given area and if one meets their highmoral standards, these brownies secretly enter the household. Atnight, while the residents are asleep, they perform a variety ofhelpful tasks: spinning, baking bread, repairing farm imple¬ments, keeping foxes out of the hen house, mending clothes, andperforming other household tasks. If a thief creeps silently intothe house, they will make enough noise to awaken the residents.Watchdogs and domestic animals consider brownies friendly andnever attack or even bark at them.All brownies ask in exchange for their labor is a little milk,some bread, and an occasional bit of fruit. Etiquette demandsthat no notice be taken of them. If the residents boast about thepresence of a brownie, the brownie vanishes.Brownies are not greedy, but they do have small hoards oftreasure which they have taken from evil monsters or received asgifts irom humans. A brownie sometimes leaves his treasure in alocation where a good person in need is bound to find it.Strangers and outsiders are constantly watched by the brown¬ies of the community until their motives are established. If thebrownies decide that a stranger is harmless, he is left in peace. Ifnot, the brownies unite and drive the intruder out.Brownies know every nook and cranny of the areas where theylive, and thus make excellent guides. If asked politely, there is a50% chance that a brownie will agree to act as a guide.Ecology: Brownies are basically vegetarians who live very com¬fortably on the gleanings of agricultural life. They make efficientuse of leftovers that are too small for humans to notice. Whenbrownies glean from fields, they do so after harvest, gatheringgrains and fruits which might otherwise he wasted.Killmoulis: The killmoulis is a distant relative of the brownie,standing under 1-foot in height but with a disproportionatelylarge head and a prodigious nose. Killmoulis are able to blendinto surroundings and are therefore 10% detectable. They live insymbiotic relationships with humans, usually where foodstuffsare handled, making their homes under the floors, and in thewalls and crawlspaces.
CarnivorousLow to average (5-10)Individual: l K, L, M # (B)Chaotic evilBugbears are giant, hairy cousins of goblins who frequent thesame areas as their smaller relatives.Bugbears are large and very muscular, standing 7' tail. Theirhides range from light yellow to yellow brown and their thickcoarse hair varies in color from brown to brick red. Thoughvaguely humanoid in appearance, bugbears seem to contain theblood of some large carnivore. Their eyes recall those of somesavage bestial animal, being greenish white with red pupils, whiletheir ears are wedge shaped, rising from the top of their heads. Abugbear s mouth is full of long sharp fangs.Bugbears have a nose much like that of a bear with the samefine sense of smell. It is this feature which earned them theirname, despite the fact that they are not actually related to bearsin any way. Their tough leathery hide and long sharp nails alsolook something like those of a bear, but are far more dexterous.The typical bugbear's sight and hearing are exceptional, andthey can move with amazing agility when the need arises. Bug¬bear eyesight extends somewhat into the infrared, giving theminfravision out to 60 feet.The bugbear language is a foul sounding mixture of gestures,grunts, and snarls which leads many to underestimate the intelli¬gence of these creatures. In addition, most bugbears can speakthe language of goblins and hobgoblins.Combat: Whenever possible, bugbears prefer to ambush theirfoes. They impose a -3 on others' surprise rolls.If a party looks dangerous, bugbear scouts will not hesitate tofetch reinforcements. A bugbear attack will be tactically sound,if not brilliant. They will hurl small weapons, such as maces,hammers, and spears before dosing with their foes. If they thinkthey are outnumbered or overmatched, bugbears will retreat,preferring to live to fight another day.Their great strength gives them a +3 to all damage inflicted mmelee combat.If 24 or more bugbears are encountered, they will have a chiefin addition to their leaders. Chiefs have between 28 and 30 hitpoints, an Armor Class of 3, and attack as 4 Hit Die monsters.Chiefs are so strong that they gain a +4 bonus to all damagecaused in melee. Each chief will also have a sub-chief who ts iden¬tical to the leaders described above.In a lair, half of the bugbears will be females and young whowill not fight except in a life or death situation. If they are forcedinto combat, the females attack as hobgoblins and the young askobolds.The species survives primarily by hunting. They have no com¬punctions about eating anything they can kill, including humans,goblins, and any monsters smaller than themselves. They are al¬so fond of wine and strong ale, often drinking to excess.Bugbears are territorial, and the size of the domains vary withthe size of the group and its location. It may be several squaremiles in the wilderness, or a narrow, more restricted area in anunderground region.Intruders are considered a valuable source of food and trea¬sure, and bugbears rarely negotiate. On occasion, they will par¬ley if they think they can gain something exceptional by it.Bugbears sometimes take prisoners to use as slaves.Extremely greedy, bugbears love glittery, shiny objects andweapons. They are always on the lookout to increase theirhoards of coins, gems, and weapons through plunder and am¬bush.Habitat Society; Bugbears prefer to live in caves and in under¬ground locations. A lair may consist of one large cavern or agroup of caverns. They are well-adapted to this life, since theyoperate equally well in daylight and darkness.If a lair is uncovered and 12 or more bugbears are encounteredthey will have a leader. These individuals have between 22 and 25hit points, an Armor Glass of 4, and attack as 4 Hit Die monsters.Ecology: Bugbears have two main goals in life: survival andtreasure. They are superb carnivores, winnowing out the weakand careless adventurer, monster and animal. Goblins are alwayson their toes when bugbears are present, for the weak or stupidquickly end up in the stewpot.
Aptly called a landshark, the bulette (pronounced Boo-lay) is aterrifying predator that lives only to eat. The bulette is univer¬sally shunned, even by other monsters.It is rumored that the bulette ts a cross between an armadilloand a snapping turtle, but this is only conjecture. The buletteshead and hind portions are blue-brown, and they are coveredwith plates and scales ranging from gray-blue to blue-green.Nails and teeth are dull ivory, The area around the eyes is brown-black, the eyes are yellowish and the pupils are blue green.Combat: A bulette will attack anything it regards as edible. Theonly things that it refuses to eat are elves, and it dislikes dwarves.The bulette is always hungry, and is constantly roaming its terri¬tory in search of food. When burrowing underground, the land-shark relies on vibrations to detect prey. When it sensessomething edible {Le„, senses movement), the bulette breaks tothe surface crest first and begin its attack. The landshark has atemperament akin to the wolverine—stupid, mean, and fearless.The size, strength, and numbers of its opponents mean nothing.The bulette always attacks, choosing as its target the easiest orclosest prey. When attacking, the bulette employs its large jawand front feet.The landshark can jump up to 8 feet with blinding speed, anddoes this to escape if cornered or injured. While in the air, thebulette strikes with all four feet, causing 3d6 points of damage foreach of the rear feat as well. The landshark has two vulnerableareas; the shell under its crest is only AC 6 (but it is only raisedduring intense combat), and the region of the bulette s eyes is AC4, but this is a small oval area about 8 inches across.Habitat Society: Fortunately for the rest of the world, the bu¬lette is a solitary animal, although mated pairs (very rare) willshare the same territory. In addition, other predators rarely sharea territory with a landshark for fear of being eaten. The bulettehas no lair, preferring to winder over its territory, above and be¬low ground, burrowing down beneath the soil to rest. Since theirappetites are so voracious, each landshark has a large territorythat can range up to 30 square miles.Bulettes consume their victims, clothing, weapons, and all,and the powerful acids in the stomach quickly digest the armor,weapons, and magical items of their victims. They are not abovenibbling on chests or sacks of coins either, the bulette motto be¬ing eat first and think later. When everything in the territory iseaten, the bulette will move on in search of a new territory. Thesole criteria for a suitable territory is the availability of food, so abulette will occasionally stake out a new territory near humanarid ha If ling territories and terrorize the residents.Very little is known of the life cyde of the bulette. They pre¬sumably hatch from eggs, but no young have ever been found,though small landsharks of 6 Hit Dice have been killed. It may bethat the bulette is hatched from very small eggs, with few youngsurviving to maturity. Still other sages theorize that the bulettebears live young. There is also evidence that the bulette, like carpand sharks, grow larger as they get older, for unusually largelandsharks of 11 feet tall and taller have been seen. Certainly noone has ever come upon the carcass of a bulette that died of oldage.Ecology: The bulette has a devastating effect on the ecosystemof any area it inhabits. Literally nothing that moves is safe fromit—man, animal, or monster. In the process of hunting androaming, the landshark will uproot trees of considerable size. Inhilly and rocky regions, the underground movements of the bu¬lette can start small landslides. Ogres, trolls, and even some gi¬ants all move off in search of greener and safer pastures when abulette appears. A bulette can turn a peaceful farming commu¬nity into a wasteland in a few short weeks, for no sane human ordemihuman will remain in a region where a bulette has beensighted.There is only one known benefit to the existence of the bulette:The large plates behind its head make superb shields, and dwar-ven smiths can fashion them into shields of +1 to +3 in value.Some also claim that the soil through which a bulette has passedbecomes imbued with magical, rock-dissolving properties. Manywould argue, however, that these benefits are scarcely worth theprice.
The bullywugs are a race of bipedal, frog-like amphibians. Theyinhabit swamps, marshes, meres, or other dank places.Bullywugs are covered with smooth, mottled olive green hidethat is reasonably tough, giving them a natural AC of 6. Theycan vary in size from smaller than the average human to aboutseven feet in height. Their faces resemble those of enormousfrogs, with wide mouths and large, bulbous eyes; their feet andhands are webbed. Though they wear no clothing, all bullywugsuse weapons, armor, and shields if they are available, Bullywugshave their own language and the more intelligent ones can speaka limited form of the common tongue.Combat; Bullywugs always attack in groups, trying to use theirnumbers to surround their enemies. Whenever they can, bully¬wugs attack with their hop, which can be up to 30 feet forwardand 15 feet upward. When attacking with a hop, bullywugs add a+1 bonus to thdr attack (not damage) rolls, and double the dam¬age if using an impaling weapon. This skill, combined with theiroutstanding camouflage abilities, frequently puts the bullywugsin an ideal position for an ambush {-2 penalty to opponent's sur¬prise rolls).Habitat/Society: More intelligent than frogs, all bullywugs livein organized or semi-organized socially fascist groups, cooperat¬ing for the purpose of hunting and survival. They live primarilyon fish and any other game, preferring a diet of meat. They areadept hunters and fisherman, and skilled in the use and construc¬tion of snares and nets.Bullywug society is a savage one. Males are the dominant sex,and females exist only to lay eggs. Though females and youngmake up about one-half of any tribe, they count for little in thesocial order. The only signs of respect that bullywugs everbestow are toward their leader and their bizarre frog god. Therace is chaotic evil, and totally lacking in any higher emotions orfeelings.The leader of a bullywug community is a large individual with8 hit points. Communities of 30 or more bullywugs have fivesubleaders (8 hp each) and a powerful leader (2 HD, 12 + hp r +1to damage). Communities of 60 or more bullywugs have a chief¬tain G HD. 20 + hp, +2 to damage) and five subchieftains (2HD, 12+ hp, +1 to damage).All bullywugs favor dank, dark places to live, since they mustkeep their skin moist. Most bullywugs live In the open and main¬tain only loose territorial boundaries. Ordinary bullywugs donot deal with incursions into their territory very efficiently, butthey kill and eat interlopers if they can. They hate their large rela¬tives (advanced bullywugs, see below) with a passion, and makewar upon them at every opportunity. Bullywugs prize treasure,though it benefits them little. They value coins and jewels, andoccasionally a magical item can be found amongst their hoard.On an individual level, bullywugs lack the greed and po-werlust seen in the individuals of other chaotic races, such asores. Fighting among members of the same group, for example, isalmost nonexistent. Some would say that this is because theylack the intelligence to pick a fight, and not from a lack of spite.The tribes are lead by the dominant male, who kills and eats theprevious leader when it is too old to rule. This is one of the fewinstances when they fight among themselves.Ecology: Bullywugs tend to disrupt ecosystems, rather than filla niche in them. They do not have the intelligence to harvest theirfood supplies sensibly and will fish and hunt in an area until itsnatural resources are depleted, and then move on to a new terri¬tory. They hate men, and will attack them on sight, but fortu¬nately prefer to dwell in isolated regions far from human beings.A small number of bullywugs are largeT and more intelligent thanthe rest of their kind. These bullywugs make their homes in aban¬doned buildings and caves, and send out regular patrols andhunting parties. These groups tend to be well equipped and orga¬nized, and stakeout a regular territory, which varies with the sizeof the group. They are more aggressive than their smaller cous¬ins, and will fight not only other bullywugs but other monsters aswell. The intelligent bullywugs also organize regular raids out¬side their territory for food and booty, and especially prize hu¬man flesh. Since they are chaotic evil, all trespassers, includingother bullywugs, are considered threats or sources of food.For every 10 advanced bullywugs in a community, there is a10% chance of a 2ndTevel shaman being present.
The carrion crawler is a scavenger of subterranean areas, feedingprimarily upon carrion. When such food becomes scarce, how¬ever, it will attack and kill living creatures hThe crawler looks like a cross between a giant green cutwormand a cephalopod* Like so many other hybrid monsters, the car¬rion crawler may well be the result of genetic experimentation bya mad, evil wizard.The monster s head, which is covered with a tough hide thatgives it Armor Class 3, sprouts eight slender, writhing tentacles.The body of the carrion crawler is not well protected and has anarmor class of only 7. The monster is accompanied by a rank,fetid odor which often gives warning of its approach.Combat: The carrion crawler can move along walls, ceilingsand passages very quickly, using its many clawed feet for trac¬tion.When attacking, the monster lashes out with its 2' long tenta¬cles, each of which produces a sticky secretion that can paralyzeits victims for 2-12 turns. A save versus paralyzation is allowedto escape these effects. They kill paralyzed creatures with theirbite which inflicts 1-2 points of damage. The monster will alwaysattack with all of its tentacles.Carrion crawlers are non-intelligent, and will continue to at¬tack as long as any of their opponents are unparalyzed. Groupsof crawlers attacking together will not fight in unison, but willeach concentrate on paralyzing as many victims as they can.When seeking out prey they rely primarily on their keen sensesof sight and smell. Clever travelers have been known to fool anapproaching carrion crawler with a sight and smell illusion, thusgaining time to make good their escape.cooperate in hunting, but merely share the same space and com¬pete fiercely for the same food. If 2 crawlers have made a kill ordiscovered carrion, they will often Fight over the food, some¬times killing one another in the process,The carrion crawler mates once a year. Several days after mat¬ing, the female will go off in search of a large kill. When she hasfound or killed an adequate food supply, she lays about 100 eggsamong the carrion. The grubs hatch one week later and beginfeeding,Maternal care ceases once the eggs have been laid and it is notuncommon for eggs to later be eaten by the female who laidthem. Females die a few weeks after laying their eggs, exhaustedby the effort. Males live only a short time longer, having matedwith as many females as possible. Grubs have been known toconsume one another in feeding frenzies, and are a favorite foodof adult carrion crawlers. Few of the grubs reach maturity butthose who do have eaten voraciously and will achieve their fullsize in a single year. When they reach maturity the mating cyclebegins again.These monsters exist on the most basic instinctual level, havingno more intelligence than earthworms or most insects. The carri¬on crawler is driven by two urges: food and reproduction. It hasabsolutely no interest in the collection of treasure.Habitat/Society: Carrion crawlers are much-feared denizens ofthe underground world. They live in lairs, venturing out insearch of carrion or food every few days. Some underground in¬habitants such as goblins and trolls will make use of carrioncrawlers by leaving the bodies of dead foes out in designated ar¬eas. This keeps the creatures at a good distance from their ownhomes and encourages them to “patrol" certain areas. Some oreshave been known to chain live prisoners near the lairs of thesefearsome monsters.Carrion crawlers will sometimes live with a mate or in a smallgroup numbering no more than 6, This does not mean that theyEcology: The carrion crawler provides the same useful, if dis¬agreeable, function that jackals, vultures, and crows perform,Like so many other predators carrion crawlers instinctively preyon the weak, sick, and foolish. In the long run, this has a benefi¬cial effect on the prey, strengthening its gene pool. The carrioncrawler also works wonders in over crowded caverns, quicklyeliminating population problems among the weaker monsters.Thus, the life cycle of the crawler is inextricably linked to thoseof its prey—when the prey flourishes so does the crawler.
2-5 <ld4 + l)/2-5 (Id4 +1)/2-5 Ild4 + 1)/ 2-5 (LH + 1)/
The great cats are among the most efficient of all predators.CheetahThe cheetah is a medium-si zed, lightly built cat. Its fur is sandcolored and it is covered with dark spots. The cheetah is uniqueamong cats because of its non-retractable claws.A skilled hunter endowed with natural camouflage, victims ofa cheetah attack suffer a -3 on their surprise roll. They are famedfor their tremendous bursts of speed, and can run at triple speed145 feet per round) for three rounds. The cat must rest 3 turnsbefore sprinting again. Cheetahs can spring 10 feet upward or 20feet forward. If both forepaws hit during an attack the cheetah isable to rake for 1-2 points of damage with each of its rear daws.If defending their young, cheetahs receive a +2 on their attackand damage rolls and will fight to the death.Cheetahs inhabit warm plains and grasslands, often sharingtheir range with lions. Their favorite prey are the antelope thatinhabit the plains, and they rarely attack men. Cheetahs are terri¬torial but may live alone, in pairs and in groups. The femaleraises a litter of 2-4 young alone. The young,, who stay with theirmother for as long as 2 years, can be completely trained and do¬mesticated.The fortunes of the cheetah rise and fall with those of its prey;when the population of antelope and other game declines, sodoes that of the cheetah.The jaguar is a powerful cat with a deep chest and muscularlimbs. Its color ranges from light yellow to brownish red, and it iscovered with dark spots.The jaguar will attack anything that it perceives as a threat. Itrelies on stealth to dose with its prey often pouncing fromabove. The jaguar can leap 30' to attack. If both of its forepawsstrike it will rake with its two rear daws for 2-5 Ud4 + 1) pointsof damage each.The jaguar inhabits jungles, spending a great deal of time in treetops. It climbs, swims, and stalks superbly. Jaguars are solitary andterritorial, meeting only to mate. If found in a lair, there is a 75%chance there will be 1-3 cubs. Cubs do not fight effectively,Their strength and ferocity make jaguars one of the mostfeared predators of the jungle.The leopard is a graceful cat with a long body and relativelyshort legs. Its color varies from buff to tawny, and its spots arerosette shaped.Leopards prefer to leap on their prey imposing a -3 on the sur¬prise rolls of their victims. Leopards can spring upward 20 feet orahead 25 feet. If they strike successfully with both forepaws, theyrake with their rear claws for 1-4 points each.Leopards are solitary, inhabiting warm deserts, forest, plains,and mountains. They hunt both day and night preying on ani¬mals up to the size of large antelopes. They swim and climb well,and will often sit in treetops sunning themselves. Leopards willalso drag their prey to safety in the treetops to devour in peace.The female bears 1-3 young, and cares for them for up to twoyears. If found in the lair, there is a 25 % chance that there will becubs there. The young have no effective attack.A skilled predator, the leopard is often threatened by humanincursions. In areas where it is hunted, it is nocturnal.Among the largest and most powerful of the great cats, lionshave yellow or golden brown fur, The males are distinguished bytheir flowing manes.Both male and female lions are fierce fighters. Lions hum inprides, with females doing most of the actual hunting. Since theirsenses are so keen, lions can only be surprised on a 1. All lionscart leap as far as 30 feet. Males have an Armor Class of 5 in theirforequarters and 6 in their hindquarters while females are ArmorClass 6 in all areas. If a lion hits with both forepaws, it can rakewith Us rear claws doing 2-7 points damage each.Lions prefer warmer dimates, thriving in deserts, jungles,grasslands, and swamps. They live and hunt in prides, and areextremely territorial A pride usually consists of 1-3 males and 1-10 females. Lions frequently kill animals the size of zebras or gi¬raffes, Lionesses will cooperate when hunting, driving their preyinto an ambush. They have been known to attack domestic live¬stock, but will almost never attack men. A lair will contain from1-10 cubs which are 30%-60% grown. Cubs are unable to fight.Lions are poor climbers and dislike swimming.Lions flourish only when the supply of game is adequate. Theirsize and strength have made them a favorite target of humanhunters.Not a true lion, this brownish cat is lankier than its large cousins.Except for their size, males and females are difficult to tell apart.The mountain lion is more cautious and less aggressive than itslarger relatives. They can spring upward 15 feet or ahead 20 feetto attack or retreat. If they score hits with both of their forepaws,they will rake with their back ones for 1-4 points of damage each.It will not attack men unless threatened.Mountain lions range in warm and temperate mountains, for¬ests, swamps, and plains. They are solitary, with males and fe¬males each maintaining separate territories. Their favorite preyare deer. The female rears 2-4 cubs alone, which remain with herfor 1-2 years.The mountain lion is flexible and elusive. It is adept at surviv¬ing on the fringes of human civilization-Spotted lions are large, fierce, dappled versions of the lion. Theyare generally found in the plains of the Pleistocene epoch, andrarely occur elsewhere.The giant lynx is distinguished by its tufted ears and cheeks,short bobbed tail, and dappled coloring. It has a compact muscu¬lar body, with heavy legs and unusually large paws.The giant lynx is the most intelligent of the great cats and usesits wits in combat. When hiding, a giant lynx will avoid detection90% of the time. The lynx tan leap up to 15 feet and imposes a -6on the surprise rolls of its prey It has a 75% chance of detectingtraps. If a giant lynx strikes with both forepaws, it attempts arear claw rake, causing 1-3 points of damage per claw\ The giantlynx almost never attacks men.The giant lynx prefers cold coniferous and scrub forests. Theycan communicate in their own language with others of its kind,which greatly increases its chances of survival The nocturnallynx stalks or ambushes its prey, catching rodents, young deer,grouse, and other smalt game. The cubs remain with their motherfor 6 months.The giant lynx has all the advantages of the great cats plus theadded bonus of a high intelligence which makes it even moreadaptable.The tiger is the largest and most feared of the great cats. Tigershave reddish-o range fur and dark vertical stripes.A tiger is a redoubtable foe in battle and is surprised only on a1. They are experts in stalking and often hunt in pairs or groups.They can leap 10 feet upward, and spring forward 30 feet to 50feet to attack. If they strike successfully with both forepaws,their rear daws rake for 2-8 (2d4j points of damage per claw.This species ranges from the subarctic to the tropics, generallyinhabiting wooded or covered terrain. Tigers are nocturnal, soli¬tary, graceful climbers and swimmers who are capable of sus¬tained high speed. These animals rarely fight among themselves,but will protect their territories ferociously They are also themost unpredictable and dangerous of the great cats, not hesitat¬ing to attack men. Their favorite prey includes cattle, wild pigsand deer, females raise their 1-3 cubs alone. The cubs remainwith their mother for several years. Lf encountered in the lair,there is a 25% chance that the cubs will be present.Feared by men, tigers are hunted aggressively and axe threat¬ened by the destruction of forests. In the untamed wilderness,however, the tiger occupies the top predatory niche.Although not truly a member of the cat family the so-calledsabre-toothed tiger is similar to them in many ways. Smilodonsare known for their 6 inches long fangs which are capable of in¬flicting terrible wounds. Their powerful jaws and large teeth givethem a +2 on their attack rolls. They are similar to normal tigersbut are found only during the Pleistocene epoch.Cats of different sizes and colorations are common throughoutthe world. Some are pets, while many are wild.Combat: Cats are efficient hunters, moving with grace andstealth; opponents suffer a “3 penalty on surprise rolls. A cat'sexcellent senses and agility allows it to be surprised only on a 1 or2. Its senses also allow it to hunt efficiently at night.Cats attack with their claws and teeth; if they hit with frontclaws, they rake with rear daws. A domestic cat's daws and rakeeach count as only one attack, rather than one per daw.Cats have retractable claws which can be extended for dimb-ing or drawn in for speed. They are agile climbers and can scaleor move in trees at half normal movement rate. They can leapgreat distances to avoid obstacles or spring onto prey.Habitat/Sodety: Cats are common in settled regions. Many cul¬tures keep them as pets, and they can be found in the homes ofnobles and peasants alike. Some societies worship cats as divinebeings, while other nations fear and hate them as the minions ofevil.Ecology: Cats are commonly used to control rodent populations,though some hunters use them to recover downed birds and oth¬er small prey.There are many breeds of domestic cat, all of which share basiccharacteristics, differing only in outward appearance. An aver¬age adult cat weighs eight to ten pounds, though some pamperedspecimens can weigh as much as 25 pounds*Cats seldom attack creatures larger than themselves, thoughthey will defend themselves. They often chase and kill mice,birds, rats, and other small creatures. A domestic cat is capableof a burst of speed, boosting its movement rate to 18 for a roundand maintaining such speed for IdlO rounds.A well-treated cat will live for 15 years or more. The cats ges¬tation period is about two months, with ld4 + l kittens in eachlitter. Kittens are weaned when about eight weeks old. Mothercats will fight to the death to defend kittens.Wild cats are very similar to domestic cats, and some were petsthat went feral. Generally, wild cats are tougher, stronger, andmore capable hunters than domestic cats.Cats kept by elves have evolved into magical creatures, possiblyaided by arcane means. They are very intelligent and have theirown language, and many can speak a crude form of the elventongue. Some live with gnomes, brownies, or woodland crea¬tures* and also speak a basic form of their keepers 1 language.Most have gray-brown fur with dark stripes.Elven cats are very stealthy, imposing a -5 penalty to oppo¬nents' surprise rolls. They are surprised only on a 1. Elven catshave a 99.9% chance to move silently, and a 90% chance to hidein wilderness areas. They are excellent climbers, can leap 20 feetwith ease, and enjoy swimming and playing in water.Elven cats have magical abilities that they use to avoid ene¬mies. They have limited ESP which is used to determine intent.They can use enlarge and trip once per day and reduce and freetwice per day; for magical abilities, elven cats are treated as 9 th-level spellcasters. Enlarge doubles an elven cat's Hit Dice anddamage; tree allows it to assume the form of a trees limb.
The catoblepas is a bizarre, loathsome creature that inhabits dis¬mal swamps and marshes. Its most terrifying features are its largebloodshot eyes, from which emanate a deadly rayThe body of the catoblepas is like that of a large, bloated buf¬falo, and its legs are stumpy Like those of a pygmy elephant or ahippopotamus. Its long, snakey tail is swift and strong, and canmove with blinding speed* The head of the catoblepas is perchedupon a long, weak neck, and would be much like that of a wart-hog except that the catoblepas is uglier.Combat; In combat, the catoblepas relies on two forms of at¬tack.First , it will use its strong, snaky tail to strike and stun its foes.Anyone struck by the tail suffers 1-6 points of damage and has abase 75% chance of being stunned for 1-10 melee rounds. Thebase chance of being stunned is lowered by 5% for every levelabove first, or for each additional Hit Die in the case of monstersand animals.Despite the danger of a tail strike, the catoblepas' second modeof attack is by far the more fearsome of the two. The gaze of thecatoblepas emanates a deathray , with a 60 yard range. Any crea¬ture meeting its gaze dies without a saving throw. If a party issurprised by a catoblepas, there is a 1 in 6 chance that someone inthe group has met the creature s gaze. Those who close their eyesor act with their eyes averted can still be affected by thedeathmy, but a saving throw vs. death magic is allowed.Since the neck of the creature is very weak, it has only a 25%chance of raising its head and using the death my on subsequentrounds. If the catoblepas and its target are both relatively still, thisincreases by 15% per melee round. If the catoblepas is forced to fol¬low quick motions it has only a 10% chance of raising its head.If more than one catoblepas is attacking, the monsters will co¬operate with one another, attempting to herd their targets into acrossfire.Habitat Society: For the most part, the catoblepas is a mean¬dering creature that wanders about its swamp nibbling on marshgrasses and the like. Once a month, usually under the light of thefull moon, the catoblepas seeks out meat to round out its diet. Itis at this time that the catoblepas is most likely to be encounteredby adventurers.The lair of the catoblepas is usually some sort of shelteredplace where the ground is firm. More often than not it is sur¬rounded by a tall stand of reeds or other marsh plants. The crea¬ture has little fear of being disturbed in its lain since it isfrequently the most feared carnivore in the swamp.The catoblepas mates for life and when more than one catoble¬pas is encountered they will be a mated pair. There is a 10%chance that the couple will have a single offspring with them. Animmature catoblepas will have half the Hit Dice of an adult. Ittakes almost nine years for the offspring to reach youthful matu¬rity and an adult female will bear but one child every 10 or 12years. Both the male and the female will cooperate in raising theoffspring.When the catoblepas ventures forth to hunt it eats fish* marshbirds, eels, water rats, large amphibians, snakes, and otherswamp animals. The catoblepas usually stuns its prey with its tailand then kills it with its gaze.The catoblepas is an opportunistic predator when it hunts andit is not above eating carrion. Since it is semi-intelligent r it willtreat parties of humans with respect, preferring to size them upfirst. As a rule* it will not attack unless it is hunting or feels thatits mate or offspring is threatened. Being long-lived (150 to 200years or so) and semi-intelligent, the catoblepas is capable oflearning from the mistakes of earlier encounters and hunts.The catoblepas has no special interest in wealth, and the listedtreasure type is the result of victorious encounters with intruders.It attaches no value to the coins, gems* and occasional magicalitems strewn about the lair.Ecology: The catoblepas has no natural enemies, since its gazeprovides it with more than adequate protection from even thefiercest of predators.
The cave fisher is a large insectoid that has adapted to life belowground. It combines many of the characteristics of a spider and alobster.The cave fisher has a hard, chitmous shell of overlappingplates and eight kgs. The b rear legs are used for movement andtraction on stony walls and corridors. Because of these limbs, thefisher has no difficulty in moving up and down vertical walls.The front pair of legs are equipped with powerful pincers, whichare used for killing and dismembering prey. The most unusualfeature of the cave fisher is its long snout, which can fire a strong,adhesive filament. The monster can also use its adhesive to an¬chor itself in place on walls and ledges.Combat: The cave fisher has two wavs of hunting. Its preferredmethod is to string its long filament in the vicinity of its lair. Thefilaments are thin and strong, making them exceedingly difficultto detect or cut. There is only a 20% chance of noticing thestrand at 10', and no chance at all of seeing them at a greaterdistance, A detect snares and pits spell will reveal a strand. Thefilament is coated with an adhesive which can only be dissolvedby liquids with a high alcohol content (such as the cave fishersblood)- The filaments can only be cut by ^1 or better edgedweapons.The fisher's: favorite food are small, flying creatures like bats.Ever opportunistic, they are constantly trying to vary their dietby trapping a careless adventurer, foolish goblin, or ore (provid¬ed that they think that they can get away with it), If more thanone fisher inhabits a lair, they will frequently pool their resourcesto catch larger prey. Once the victim is trapped in the filament,the cave fisher draws its prey in- reeling its filament in like a fish¬ing line.Should a tempting target escape the monster s neatly laid traps,the cave fisher will try another mode of attack. It will spend oneround drawing its filament in and then shoot it at the prey, slrik*ing as a 6 Hit Die monster. It will try to snare its prey in thismanner so long as it remains within the fisher's established terri¬tory, If the prey is hit by the filament, the monster can pull aweight of up to 400 pounds at a movement rate of 15' per round.In the event that a “tug of war ’ breaks out, the fisher has astrength of IS 00 with its strand.Habital/Sodety: Cave fishers prefer living on ledges and caves lo¬cated above well-traveled paths- sharing their lairs with others oftheir kind. No more than four cave fishers will be found in one lair.Their filaments are always strung before their lair, and they attemptto kill anything they trap, often storing food for future use.Their territories are very small, and never larger than about300 feet to either side of the lair. Anything man-sized or smaller isconsidered fair game by the cave fisher and haffUngs are thoughtto be tasty treats. A single cave fisher would never attack a large,well armed party for the sake of a single meal. Still, they are cun¬ning, and a group of the monsters might reel in their filamentsand attempt an ambush if they thought they could get away withit. If hunting in one area becomes scarce, the cave fisher will sim¬ply find a new area to hunt, where the small game is more plenti¬ful and careless.Like all predators, the cave fisher is interested in survival. Thismeans a steady supply of food and a mate. Females lay eggs inthe vicinity of the lair, which they protect from predators. Theyoung scatter when the eggs hatch, seeking lairs of their own.Although the cave fisher does not collect treasure, its lair isoften strewn with the possessions of its former victims.Ecology: The cave fisher preys primarily on small flying game,and in the subterranean world this frequently means a diet ofbats. It is not the top predator in its ecological niche, and haslearned caution in dealing with other monsters. The cave fisher issufficiently intelligent to know the dangers of preying on large,well-organized groups, who might grow tired of its depredationsand hunt it to extinction. The monster instinctively picks theeasiest route for survival, and relies on stealth and cunning totrap its prey and avoid being eaten itself.The filaments of the cave fisher are highly prized by manythieves guilds, for they can be made into thin and very strongrope which is nearly invisible. The filaments are wound ontoreels and then specially treated to dilute the adhesive. The result¬ing strands are made into ropes, while the diluted adhesive isturned into a special solution, which when applied to gloves andboots, greatly increases traction for climbing.Centaurs are woodland beings who shun the company of men.They dwell in remote, secluded glades and pastures.The appearance of a centaur is unmistakable: they have theupper torso, arms, and head of a human being and the lowerbody of a large, powerful horse,Centaurs speak their own language and some among them(about 10%) can converse in the tongue of elves.Combat: A band of centaurs is always armed, and the leaderscarry shields. Half ot the centaurs will be wielding oaken clubs(the equivalent of morning stars), one quarter will carry compos¬ite bows and have 10-30 arrows (either flight or sheaf, dependingon the current state of affairs in the area). The remainder of theband will be leaders (AC4; HD5) using medium shields and medi¬um horse lances. Centaurs make 3 attacks each round in melee;once with their weapons and twice with their hooves.Habitat/Sodety: Centaurs are sociable creatures, taking greatpleasure in the society of others of their kind. Their overall orga¬nization is tribal, with a tribe divided into family groups livingtogether in harmony. The size of the tribe varies, it range from 3-4 families to upwards of 20 families. Since males have the danger¬ous roles of hunter and protector, females outnumber males bytwo to one. The centaur mates for life, and the entire tribe partic¬ipates in the education of the young.The lair is located deep within a forest, and consists of a large,hidden glade and pasture with a good supply of running water.Depending upon the climate, the lair may contain huts or lean-tos to shelter the individual families. Centaurs are skilled in hor¬ticulture, and have been known to cultivate useful plants in thevicinity of their lair. In dangerous, monster infested areas, cen¬taurs will sometimes plant a thick barrier of tough thorn bushesaround their lair and even set traps and snares. In the open area,away from the trees, are hearths for cooking and warmth. If en¬countered in their lair H there will be 1-6 additional males, femalesequal to twice the number of males, and 3-30 young. The females(3 Hit Dice) and the young (1-3 Hit Dice) will right only with theirhooves, and only in a life or death situation.Each tribe will have a priest who is treated as a leader but hasthe spell abilities of a 3rd level druid.Centaurs survive through a mixture of hunting, foraging, fish¬ing, agriculture and trade. Though they shun dealings with hu¬mans, centaurs have been known to trade with elves, especiallyfor food and wine, The elves are paid from the group treasury,which comes from the booty of slain monsters.The territory of a centaur tribe varies with its size and the na¬ture of the area it inhabits. Centaurs are also not above sharing aterritory with elves. The attitude of a centaur toward a strangerin its territory will vary with the visitor. Humans and dwarveswill usually be asked to leave in a polite manner, while halflingsor gnomes will be tolerated, and elves will be welcomed. Mon¬sters will be dead with in a manner according to the threat theyrepresent to the welfare and survival of the tribe. Were a giant ordragon to enter the territory, the centaurs would pull up stakesand relocate, while trolls and ores and their like will be killed.Centaurs will take the treasure of their fallen foes , and are fullyaware of its value. Most male centaurs have a small coin supply,while the tribe has a treasury which may well include some magi¬cal items. Leaders will have twice the normal individual treasure.This treasure is used to buy food tor the group, or to ransom(90% likely) captured or threatened members of the tribe,While basically neutral or chaotic good, centaurs have beenknown to become rowdy, boorish, and aggressive when underthe influence of alcohol. They are also extremely protective oftheir females and young. Centaurs are basically pastoral, but willreact with violence if their lifestyle and survival is threatened.Ecology: The centaur lives in dose harmony with nature andspends its lifetime carefully conserving the natural resourcesaround its lair. The race seems to have an innate knowledge ofhow to achieve this precious balance. If forced to chop down atree, a centaur will plant another to replace it, Centaurs neverover hunt or over fish an area as a human group might do, butchoose their game with care, limiting the amount they eat.Giant centipedes are loathsome, crawling arthropods that amuse al¬most universal disgust from all intelligent creatures {even other mon¬sters). They are endemic to most regions.One of the things that makes the centipede so repulsive is its resem¬blance to the worm. Its long body is divided into many segmentsfrom which protrude many tiny feet. Hence the name "centipede' (orhundred-footed I. The giant centipede is so named because it is over1-toot tong. The body is plated with a chitinous shell and it moveswith a slight undulating motion. The creature has the added benefitof protective coloration, and varies in color depending on the terrainit inhabits. Those that favor rocky areas are gray, those that live un¬derground are black, while centipedes of the forest are brown or red.Combat: When hunting, centipedes use their natural coloration to re¬main unseen until they can drop on their prey from above or crawlout of hiding in pursuit of food. They attack by biting their toes andinjecting a paralytic poison. The poison can paralyze a victim for 2d6hours, but is so weak that victims are permitted a +4 bonus to theirsaving throw'. Due to its small size, the giant centipede is less likely toresist attacks and receives a - 1 penalty to all its saving throws, Al¬though a single giant centipede rarely constitutes a serious threat to aman, these creatures frequently travel in groups. When more thanone centipede is encountered, the monsters will fight independently,even to the point of fighting among themselves over fallen victims.Habitat Society: The centipede behaves like most other insects, rov¬ing from place to place in search of food; it has no set territory ordwelling. The centipede simply goes where its hunger leads it. It is anaggressive and hungry carnivore that must eat at least once a day tosurvive Hungry centipedes often resort to cannibalism.Ecology: Giant centipedes have several natural advantages, includingpoison and protective coloration, allowing them to compete withother small predators for game. Their poison bestows a certain im¬munity from being hunted, but hungry and skilled animals such ascoyotes and large predatory birds hunt them effectively in lean times.Their preferred targets are small mammals that are easily over¬come by their weak poison. If they are very hungry, however, theyhave been known to attack anything that moves, including humans.These are identical to giant centipedes save that they are only 6 inch¬es long , Their poison is weaker than that of their larger cousins and afailed saving throw will immobilize the victim for only ld6 hours.Huge centipedes make their own saving throws at “2. Mice and oth¬er large insects are the favorite prey of huge centipedes. They in turnare hunted by giant centipedes.The mega I o-centipede, because of its great size, is no longer classedas an irritant but is a threat to human and animal alike. Its acidicpoison is far more potent than that of its weaker cousins. The victimsof a m eg a J o-ee n t i pede bite receive no bonuses on their saving throwsand failure indicates death. If the target successfully resists the poi¬son, the acid burns the victim's skin, inflicting 2d4 points of damage.The megalo-centipede is more intelligent than its smaller cousinsand it is a far more cunning hunter, although they still do not cooper¬ate with each other, In the wilderness the megalo-centipede prey onanimals the size of deer. In the subterranean environment, it attacksman-sized or smaller creatures, including ores, goblins, or humans.The megalo-centipede receives no penalties to its own saving throws.This cousin of the giant centipede feeds upon and lays its eggs in car¬rion, A tunnel worm attacks by lunging out of its hidden burrow tostrike with a +2 bonus to the attack roil. Success indicates the turmelworm has seized its prey in its mandibles, but no damage is inflicteduntil the worm chews through the victim s armor. It takes one roundfor the worm to chew through leather or worse, two rounds for ar¬mor tougher than leather but no tougher than chain mail, and threerounds for armor tougher than chain mail. Once the armor isbreached, the worm automatically inflicts 2dB points of damage eachround. If the worm suffers 15 or more points of fire damage or loses60% of its hit points, it drops its victim and retreats to its lain Tunnelworm lairs often have treasure from earlier victims.
How chimerae were created is a dark mystery better left unex¬plored. The chimera has the hindquarters of a large, black goatand the forequarters of a huge, tawny lion. Its body hasbrownish-black wings like those of a dragon.The monster has three heads, those of a goat, a lion, and afierce dragon. The goal head is pitch black, with glowing ambereyes and Jong ochre horns. The lion head is framed by a brownmane and has green eyes. The dragon head is covered with or¬ange scales and has black eyes.The chimera speaks a limited form of Lhe foul language of reddragons. As a rule, however, it will only pause to communicatewith those creatures who are more powerful than itself.Combat; Its many heads and powerful physique make the chi¬mera a deadly foe in combat. The monster prefers to surprise itsvictims, often swooping down upon them from the sky. It canattack 6 times each round, clawing with its forelegs, goring withits two horns, and biting with its lion and dragon heads. If it de¬sires to do so, the dragon head can loose a stream of flame some 5yards long in lieu of biting. The dragons fire causes 3-24 (3d8)points damage, although a saving throw vs, breath weapon willcut the damage in half. The chimera will always attempt tobreathe if k& opponents are in range. If more than 1 chimera isencountered, they will attack in concert.The armor classes are split as follows; Dragon, AC 2 (flank);Lion, AC 5 (front); Goat, AC 6 (rear).Habitat Society: The chimera, being a hybrid, combines thepreferences of the lion, the goat, and the dragon In its habitat,society and ecology. The dragonish part of its nature gives thechimera a distinct preference for caves as lairs. The dragon andlion parts seem to war with one another, for some chimerae aredragon-like in their preference for solitude, while others live insmall prides. Even if they mate, offspring are rare.The monster is an omnivore. The goat head will browse on thetoughest plants and shrubs and will derive nutrition from themost barren vegetation while the lion and dragon heads can onlybe satisfied with flesh. The chimera hunts once every 3 or 4 daysusing its strength and limited intelligence to gain an advantageover those it preys on. Having a voracious appetite, it sometimesroams over territories as large as 20 square miles.Being chaotic evil in nature, the chimera enjoys preying uponmen, elves, dwarves, and half lings. It will even gladly attack oth¬er monsters in its search for food. Anyone entering its territorybecomes prey, and will be treated accordingly,The chimera cannot resist attacking groups of travelers ormonsters for another reason: its dragon nature craves the trea¬sure that its prey might be carrying. Although it has no earthlyuse for it, the chimera will gather the coins of its fallen foe into aheap and roost on it like a dragon. Its hoard is nothing like thatof a true dragon, however, and consists mainly of copper andsilver coins, with perhaps some jewelry and a few magical items.Ecology: The chimera fills the role of both omnivore and a toppredator in its ecosystem. It is very adaptable, During timeswhen its prey is scarce or non-existent, the chimera can make dowith a vegetarian diet,The gorgimera has the hindquarters of a gorgon, forequarters ofa lion, and body and wings of a red dragon. Like the chimera, ithas the heads of its three constituent creatures.The monster can attack with its claws, bite with its lion anddragon heads, and butt with its gorgon head. In place of makingits normal attack, the gorgon and dragon heads can employ theirbreath weapons. While the dragon s attack is similar to that ofthe chimera, the gorgons breath causes petrification to anycaught in its area of effect. The gorgon head can use its breathweapon twice per day to strike in a cone 3 feet long which is 1foot wide at its base and 3 feet wide at its mouth. The gorgimerawill always use one of its breath weapons if its foes are within 10feet. A save vs. petrification will allow a victim to avoid the ef¬fects of the gorgon's breath.The gorgon s head can see into both the Astral and Etherealplanes, and its breath weapon extends therein,like its relative the chimera, the gorgimera can also speak alimited form of the language of red dragons.Any subterraneanVery rareSolitaryNightCarnivoreHigh (13-14)Cloakers are fiendish horrors, related to trappers, that dwell indark places far beneath the surface of the earth, They generallyseek to kill those who enter their lairs, unless they can think upsome other, more amusing way to punish interlopers.When a cloaker is first seen, it is almost impossible to distin¬guish this monster from a common black cloak. The monstersback has two rows of black eye spots running down it that lookmuch like buttons, and the two ivory-colored daws on its upperedge can easily be mistaken for bone clasps.When it unfurls itself and moves to attack, however, its truenature becomes all too obvious. At this point, its white undersideis dear and the monster s face is fully visible. This face, with iheglow of its two piercing, red eyes and the needle-like fangs thatline its mouth, is a truly horrible sight. At this point, the monsteralso uncurls the whip-like tail at its trailing edge and begins toswish it back and forth in anticipation.Combat: When a cloaker strikes at its victim, it moves withblinding speed. Without warning, the cloaker flies at its targetand, if the attack roll is successful, engulfs its prey within itsfolds. Any creature that falls victim to this attack is all but help¬less and can be bitten easily (no roll required) for ld4 points ofdamage plus the victim's unadjusted Armor Class. Thus, an ad¬venturer in chain mail (AC 5) suffers ld4 + 5 points of damageeach round. Shields offer no protection from such attacks.While it is devouring its chosen victim, the cloaker uses its twowhip-Hke tail attacks to inflict ldo points of damage on thosewho move in to help rescue the captive. The tail is AC 1 and canbe cut off tf a total of 16 points of damage are inflicted upon it.Any attacks made on the cloaker inflict half their damage tothe cloaker and the other half to the trapped victim. Area effectspells, such as fireball cause full damage to both the monster andits victimThe cloaker can also emit a special subsonic moan of increas¬ing intensities. Although this power is blocked by stone or otherdense materials, it can be very effective in an open chamber.Cloakers may not moan and bite during the same round, Acloaker may emit one of four types of moan each round.The first intensity of moaning causes unease and numbs theminds of those within 80 feet of the cloaker. The immediate effectof this moan is to cause a - 2 penalty to the victims' attack anddamage rolls against the cloaker. Further, any creature that isforced to listen to the moan for six consecutive rounds is tempo¬rarily forced into a trance that renders it unable to attack or de¬fend itself as long as the moaning continues.The second intensity of moaning acts as a fear spell. All crea¬tures within 30 feet of the doaker must roll a successful savingthrow vs. spell or flee in terror for two rounds.The third intensity of moaning causes nausea and weaknessand affects all those in a cone 30 feet long and 20 feet wide at itsopen end. Anyone caught in this area must roll a successful sav¬ing throw vs, poison or be overcome by nausea and weakness forld4+l rounds. During Lhis time, those who fail their savingthrows are unable to act in any manner.The fourth and final in tensity of moaning acts as a hold personspell. This power can be used on only one person at a time, has arange of 30 feet, and lasts for five rounds.Each of the various effects of the cloakers moan can be defeat¬ed by the use of a neutralize poison spell on a victim.Goakers also have the power to manipulate shadows. Knownas shadow shifting, this power can be used in a number of ways,but in only one particular manner at any given time. The cloakercan employ its shadow shifting ability to obscure its opponents'vision, thus bettering its Armor Class to 1. Or the creature canproduce predse images from the shadows that can be used totrick its adversaries. One common means of employing these im¬ages is to create a duplicate of the cloaker to draw away enemyattacks. 11 this method of shadow shifting is employed, it can betreated as a mirror image spell that creates ld4 +2 images,A %/j! spell cast directly at a specific cloaker blinds it and pre¬vents it from using its shadow shifting powers.Habitat/Society: The thought processes of cloakers are utterlyalien to most other life forms. As such, they can only be commu¬nicated with by mages who have devoted long hours to trainingtheir minds in the arcane discipline necessary to understand thesecreatures.Ecology: It is believed that cloakers are asexual, although nodefinitive proof of this has ever been found.
The cockatrice is an eerie, repulsive hybrid ot lizard, cock, andbat . It is infamous for its ability to turn flesh to stone,The cockatrice is about the size of a large goose or turkey, andhas the head and body of a cock, with two bat-like wings and thelong tail of a lizard tipped with a few feathers. Its feathers aregolden brown, its beak yellow, its tail green, and its wings gray*The cockatrice's wattles, comb, and eyes are bright red.Females, which are much rarer than males, differ only in thatthey have no wattles or comb.Combat: The cockatrice will fiercely attack anything, humanor otherwise, which it deems a threat to itself or its lair. Whenattacking, the cockatrice will attempt to grapple with its foe,touching exposed flesh and turning il to stone. Flocks oi cocka¬trices will do their utmost to overwhelm and confuse their oppo¬nents, and they will sometimes fly directly into their victimsfaces.While the fatal touch of a cockatrice's beak will affect victimsclothed in leather or fabric, it will not work through metal armor.The touch will, however, extend into the ethereal plane. Thecockatrice is somewhat aware of the limits of its powers, and nat¬ural selection has taught it to strike only at exposed flesh* If largeareas of the opponent's flesh are exposed, it should be assumedthat the cockatrice automatically touches flesh. If the target isreasonably well armored, the base chance of a cockatrice strikingan area which it can affect is equal to 10% times the adjustedArmor Glass of the victim .Ha bit at Society: The cockatrice b immune to the petrificationpowers of others of its kind.The diet of the cockatrice consists of insects, small lizards andthe like. When it hunts these animals, the creature does not em¬ploy its power to petrify living things*It is distinguished from other avians by its unusual habits and nas¬ty temperament. Since females are rare, they are the dominant sex,and will often have more than one mate, in fact, males will oftenfight or Strut for the privilege of joining a females harem. These mat¬ed groups usually build their nesis in caves. Nest sites are perma¬nent, and the cockatrice constantly seeks to decorate its nesting siteby lining it with shining objects like coins and gems.Females lay 1 or 2 brownish red, rust speckled eggs per month*There is only a 25% chance that any given egg will hatch. Thosethat are fertile will hatch in 11*19 days. The young reach matu¬rity and full power within 6 monLhs. Once they achieve adult¬hood. the hatchlings are driven away from the nesting site bytheir parents, larger groups of cockatrices encountered will fre¬quently be young driven from the nest who have temporarilyunited for survival.Ecology: The cockatrice thrives in the wilderness. Its petrifica¬tion power makes it immune to most predators, and enables it tocompete with other birds for food. The feathers of the cockatriceare prized by certain wizards as many magical scrolls must beinscribed with pens made from such quilb. Many people alsoseek unhatched eggs, or even a live cockatrice, as unusual pets orguardians.Frequently mistaken for its less malignant relative, the pyrolisk isvirtually identical to the cockatrice except for the single redfeather in its tail and Lhe reddish cast of its wrings. Whereas thecockatrice is motivated by instinct alone, the pyrolisk revels inspreading mayhem. Any victims who fail to save vs* death magicwhen meeting its gaze will instantly burst Into flames, dying inagony. If the save is made, they are still burnt for 2-13 (ldl2 + 1)points of damage. Any creature innately or magically immune tofire will not be affected by its gaze, and anyone who makes theirsaving throw is thereafter immune to the gaze of lhaL particularpyrolisk.The creature can cause any fire source within 30 yards to ex¬plode in fireworks (as a pyrotechnics spell) once per round.The pyrolisk is itself immune to all fire-based spells and at¬tacks.The pyrolisk's mortal enemy is the phoenix, although any crea¬ture which the monster encounters is likely to be attacked.
Tropical and subtropical junglesVery rareSolitaryAnyOarsenHence: aura sight, all-round vision, see sound: Psychome-taholism: metamorphosis, demical simulation, ectoplasmicform; Psychoporatatlon: teleport, time shift; Telepathy:mindiink, ESR invisibility.The couatl are feathered serpents of myth and lore. It is believedthat they are distant relatives of dragons, although this remainsunproven.So rare as to be considered almost legendary; the couatl is oneof the most beautiful creatures in existence, it has the body of along serpent and feathered wings the color of the rainbow. Sinceit has the ability to polymorph, the couatl will sometimes appearin the form of other creatures (always of good alignment).Couatl are able to communicate via telepathy with almost anyintelligent creature which they encounter. In addition, they canspeak common and most serpent and avian languages,Combat; A couatl will seldom attack without provocation,though it will always attack evildoers caught red-handed. When¬ever possible, a couatl will attack from the air.Since it is highly intelligent, the couatl will frequently use itsspells from a distance before dosing with its foes, if more thanone couatl is involved, they will discuss their strategy before abattle. The couatl will also not hesitate to polymorph into an¬other, more effective form in combat.The couatl have a variety of abilities which make them morethan a match for most other creatures. In addition to being ableto polymorph themselves at will, a couatl can use magic. Fully45% will be 5th level wizards, while 35% can act as 7th levelpriests. The remaining 20% are able to use both types of abilities.In addition to their other magical abilities, couatl can renderthemselves and up to 450 pounds of additional matter ethereal atwill. Further, they can detect good/evil, detect magic, turn in risi¬ble, and employ ESP whenever they desire to do so. The oldestand most powerful of couatl can also use a ptone shift on them¬selves and up to 8 others. This ability has a 90% chance of reach¬ing the desired plane.The couatl uses its poisonous bite and constriction when forcedinto melee combat. When it bites it does 1-3 points of damage andinjects a deadly toxin. If the victim fails a save vs. poison it is killedinstantly. If the constriction attack succeeds, the victim takes 2-8points damage each round until it or the couatl is killed.Habitat/Society: This winged serpent is native to warm, jungle¬like regions but can also be found flying through the ether. Theirintelligence and goodness have made them objects of reverenceby the natives of the regions which they inhabit. Considered tobe divine, there are many legends in which the couatl is the bene¬factor of mankind and the bestower of such precious gifts as agri¬culture and medicine. There are even shrines in certain areasdedicated to the couatl, and any who attack or harm a couatl areautomatically viewed as the blackest of villains.Although solitary in nature, couatl think of themselves as asingle, extended clan. This dan is led by the oldest and wisest oftheir numbers but assembles only in dire emergencies.Most couatl dwell alone, making their lairs in caves and aban¬doned buildings in remote, uninhabited regions. They hunt jun¬gle animals for food once every fortnight or so. Many enjoytraveling, often undertaking long journeys of exploration.On rare occasions, a pair will mate for life and establish a jointlair. Unlike many other repHles, the couatl bear live young.Births are rare, averaging only one per couple each century. Bothparents participate in the rearing and education of the single off¬spring, and will fight to the death if their child is threatened.Young couatl reach maturity in thirty or forty years and, thoughsome will elect to remain with their parents for as long as a centu¬ry, will eventually set off in search of the couatl's never-endingquest for wisdom,Intellectually curious, all couatl have vast stores of informa¬tion and enjoy learning more. When one of them learns somenew and fascinating fact he will inevitably set out in search of hisbrethren to share and discuss it,Couatl can sometimes be persuaded to help good adventurersor give sound council. If they feel that they are being sought forfrivolous reasons, they will simply fly away. They are not greedyand do not seek treasure for its own sake. Aid from a couatl maywell take the form of a magical item from its hoard.Ecology; The couatl usually reigns supreme in its jungle, hav¬ing little to fear from most other monsters.
Crabmen are man-sized intelligent crabs. They walk upright ontwo pairs of legs. The small pincers tipping Lhe short arms abovetheir legs are used for fine manipulation. The two longer armsend in large daws, Two slender eyestalks bob above the beak¬like collection of mandibles which makes up the crabmansmouth. Male crabmen are often brightly colored and femalesmay be reddish-brown, green, or black,Combat; Though generally peaceful, crabmen will fight backwith their large claws if attacked, causing ld6 points of damageper hit* Males of certain subspecies have an enlarged daw onone side which does ld8 damage. Crabmen have never beenknown to wield weapons,If severed, a crabmans limbs and eyestalks will grow back in1-4 weeks.At certain times, population pressure and food shortages willcause crabmen to voraciously hunt other creatures. Most suchattacks are directed towards other tribes ol crabmen or othercoastal inhabitants. However, they will occasionally raidcoastal towns for food, attacking anything that moves. Suchsavage frenzies last only a few days, during which the crab manpopulation is generally reduced back to a tolerable level,Habitat;Society: Crabmen live as simple hunter-gatherers, sub¬sisting primarily on carrion and algae, Much of each crabman sday is spent hunting, filtering algae, or scavenging along theshore. Crab man often gather large amounts of sand into theirmouths, suck out all the organic material, and spit out fist-sizedpellets of sand and dirt* These hardened pellets betray the pres¬ence of a nearby crab man lair.Crabmen generally live in coastal caves* Some tribes dig ex¬tensive burrows in seaside cliffs. Within a burrow complex,each crab man has an individual lair, situated near a large, cen¬tral meeting area.Males and females are found in approximately equal numbersin a tribe. They mate at irregular times throughout the year. Thefemale produces about 100 eggs within two weeks* They are laidin the ocean where they hatch into clear soft-shelled, crablikelarvae. In six months they molt, develop a stronger shell, andbegin to dwell on land. The eggs and larvae are delicious, andpredators greatly reduce their numbers before they reach adult¬hood. Larvae are almost defenseless, with AC 8, I HD andweak daws which do only 1-2 points of damage per hit.Crabmen continue to grow and molt throughout their lives,and specimens as tall as 10 feet have been reported. A crabmancan live for up to 20 years,A crabman tribe seldom has commerce with other tribes, andalmost never with other intelligent races. They produce few arti¬facts, primarily seaweed weavings, driftwood carvings, andseashell constructions. Though these are often impermanent,some are quite beautiful. Though details of crabman religion areunknown, most artifacts are believed to be religious in nature,and are jealously guarded.Each tribe appears to be led by a dominant, elder male or fe¬male* These leaders have maximum hit points, but are otherwiseunremarkable.Crabmen speak their own language, which consists mostly ofhisses and clicks. The crabmcn's xenophobia and the extremedifficulty of their language make it virtually impossible for hu¬mans and similar races to learn to speak the crabman tongue.Those few sages who know anything about the language knowonly a few basic words.Crabmen are attracted to shiny metal, particularly silver-colored metal, though they seem unable to differentiate betweensilver, platinum, and steel, Crabman lairs often contain piles ofthese metals, with many pieces worked into sculptures. If themetal has rusted or tarnished, it is sometimes scraped to revealthe shine again, but often simply thrown into a refuse pile.Ecology: Crabman artifacts can sometimes bring good pricesfrom collectors, though they are often fragile, and readily de¬compose if made of plants.Crabmen are rumored to be very tasty, especially their legsand claws. Primitive coastal inhabitants, particularly sahuagin,consider them a delicacy and often raid crabman villages. Theirshells dry out and become brittle soon after they are removed ormolted, so they cannot be used as armor. The daws can be usedas passable clubs.
The much feared crawling claw is frequently employed as aguardian by those mages and priests who have learned the secretof its creation.No single description of a crawling daw is possible as they arenot uniform in appearance. Since daws are the animated remainsof hands or paws of living creatures, they are apt to be found in awide variety of shapes and sizes.Combat: When a daw detects a potential victim, it leaps to theattack. Although it may not appear to be capable of such a feat,its great strength enables it to do so. The maximum distance adaw can leap is 15 feet.Once a daw lands on its victim, it attacks in one of two ways.If the victim is wearing metal armor, the daw delivers a powerfulblow that inflicts Id4 points of damage. Against those who arenot armored (or only wearing leather! the daw can employ itsgreat strength in a crushing grip. This manner of attack causesld6 points of damage.In some cases, a claw may be instructed to attempt to strangleor gouge out the eyes of a victim. In any such case, the DMshould consider all aspects of the situation and determine howmuch, if any, damage is done.Claws are immune to any form of death magic or raise deadspells, although a resurrection spell renders them immobile for anumber of turns equal to the level of the caster. Claws have thesame resistance to charm, sleep, and hold spells that undead do,but daws are not subject to turning, control undead spells, ordamage by holy water. Cold-based spells make daws brittle sothat all rolls to damage them are increased by 1 point per die.Edged weapons inflict only half damage on a daw; all magicalweapons cause damage as if they were not enchanted in any way(although to hit bonuses still apply),Society/Hjbitat; Crawling claws are nothing more than the ani¬mated hands and paws of once-living creatures. As such, theyhave no culture or society to speak of. Despite this, crawlingclaws do have a limited ability to communicate with each other.This takes the form of a basic telepathic link between all thedaws of a single batch," Whenever one daw T finds a victim, all ofthe others in the area who were made at the same time move in tohelp it.In addition, daws that have been instructed to do so can act mconcert with each other to move large objects. The DM shoulduse five pounds per daw as a reasonable limit to the weight thatcan be moved,Ecology: Crawling daws can be created by any mage or priestwho has knowledge of the techniques required to do so. To beginwith, the creator must assemble the severed limbs that arc to ani¬mated. The maximum number of claws that can be created at anyone time is equal to the level of the person enchanting them. Thehands (or paws) can be either fresh, skeletal, or at any stage ofdecomposition in between.Claws can be controlled in one of two wavs: directly or viaprogramming. The manner of a claw's control must be specifiedwhen it is created and cannot be changed thereafter. All of theclaws in a particular batch must be controlled in the samemanner.Programmed claws are given a single, brief instruction thatthey attempt to carry out to the best of their ability. The maxi-mum length of the programming, in words, is 15 plus the level ofthe creator. This programming sets the conditions under whichthe daw attack. A sample command might be: Kill anyone ex¬cept me who opens this chest.Directly controlled daws are manipulated by the thoughts oftheir creator. The mental effort of controlling daws is quite tiringand cannot be maintained for more than three consecutiverounds without a one-round rest. Further, the range of such con¬trol is limited to 10 feet plus 5 feet per level of the creator. A per¬son controlling claws cannot undertake spellcasting or any otheractivity. Injury to a controller does not break his control unlessunconsciousness results. If direct control is broken for some rea¬son, the daws continue to follow the last orders they were given.
The crocodile is a large, dangerous predatory reptile native totropical and subtropical dimes. It spends most of its time sub¬merged in swamps, rivers, or other large bodies of water.The crocodile is one of the most feared and ugliest predators of thetropics. It has a long, squat body, ranging in size from a scant foot towell over ten feet long. Most mature specimens range from eight to15 feet long, and some even larger. Many sages argue that crocodilesnever stop growing. The crocodile has a long jaw filled with sharp,conical teeth. The powerful maw is superbly adapted for draggingprey beneath the water and dismembering it. Its four short legs arevery powerful, and can propel the crocodile rapidly through the wa¬ter and over the land. Its long tail is also very strong and is some¬times used on land to unbalance its foes.The crocodile is covered with a tough homy hide, whichblends in very well with the surrounding water. Its eyes and noseare placed so that when the crocodile floats, only they remainabove water, enabling the beast to spot and ambush prey, Thecrocodile is adept at floating through the water and remainingquite still presenting the illusion that it is nothing more than afloating log.Combat: Ever voracious, hungry crocodiles will attack anythingthat looks edible, including men. They prefer to lie in wait for theirprey (-2 penalty to opponents surprise roll), and are exceedingly sen¬sitive to movements in the water. They have been known to swiftlyand silently swim up to the shore and seize a man, dragging himbelow the surface of the water. They prefer to attack with their pow¬erful jaws, causing 2d4 points of damage, and lash with their tails forIdI2 points of damage. Crocodiles will fight among themselves forany prey they seize in their jaws, sometimes tearing their victim topieces. The only thing that can slow a crocodile is cold. They be¬come slow and sluggish (reduced to 50% of their normal movement)when the temperature falls below 40 u F.Habitat Society; Crocodiles sometimes congregate In largenumbers, but they are not by nature sociable, nor do they coop¬erate in hunting. They have well-concealed lairs and will oftendrag their prey to their lairs before eating it. When a tasty morselcomes its way, a group of crocodiles will go into a feeding frenzy,each attempting to get a part of the feast, They hunt almost daily.primarily in the water, rarely on land. Their tastes are broad:fish, men, small mammals, aquatic birds, and even a careless lionhas occasionally been known to fall into their grasp. Hungrycrocodiles will sometimes upend boats to see what falls out.Crocodiles mate once a year, and the female lays a clutch ofabout &Q eggs, carefully burying them in the sand, Unlike manyother reptiles, the female carefully guards her eggs, protectingthem from other predators. When the time comes for the eggs tohatch, the mother assists by digging the eggs out of the sand. Thenewly hatched young are thrown entirely on their own resourcesto survive. Very few of the young survive to maturity.Swamps and rivers are not the only abode of the crocodile. Inrecent years there have been dreadful rumors that some of thesereptiles have made their homes in the sewers of cities in tropicalregions, living on waste and carrion.Ecology; The crocodile is a formidable predator and has littlecompetition for food from other water creatures. One of the fewmonsters that can compete with it is the dragonturtle, Even onthe riverbanks it has little to fear from rival predators; mostwould prefer not to tangle with a crocodile. The only predatorthat the crocodile need fear is man, who hunts it for its toughhide, which can be transformed into a beautiful, gleaming leath¬er. Crocodiles are also hunted to eliminate the danger that theyrepresent to riverside communities.These creatures are far rarer than their smaller cousins. They attainsizes from 21 to 30 feel long, and they also continue to grow untildeath. Giant crocodiles typically inhabit salt water or prehistoric set¬tings, where they have been know to prey upon sharks, smallwhales, and small seagoing crafts, such as fishing boats. When at-—rfdne a small boat, their favorite technique is to ram it, attemptingpsize and smash it open with their huge jaws. They have beenknown to gorge upon the catch within the fishing boats, and then toswim away, leaving the fishermen unharmed.
Giant crustaceans are peculiar mutations of crabs and freshwatercrayfish. The first inhabits saltwater regions, while the latter isfound only in tresh water.Giant crabs look just like regular crabs except for their enormoussize. They come in a variety of colors, such as reds, browns, andgrays. They have eyes set on stalks, which enable them to seearound comers and onto ledges. Their bodies are covered by alarge, chitinous shell. Crabs are distinguished by their scuttling,sideways mode of locomotion.Combat: Always hungry crabs prefer to sneak up upon theirprey (-3 penalty to opponent's surprise roll) and catch it in theirpincers, dismembering and eating It. A successful attack by thepincers causes 2d4 points of damage. Once they have caughtsomething edible, they stop to eat it, unless they are attacked. IF acrab finds its meal in question, it attempts to scuttle off with theprize, perhaps to its den.Habitat/Soriety: The giant crab lives on the shoreline, search¬ing beaches for food and venturing into the water in search of fishand other aquatic life. It is well adapted to this sort of life, since itis able to breathe both air and water. Giant crabs frequently feedon large dead fish and other carrion washed up on the shore.They operate equally well on land and in the water. Giant crabssometimes burrow into the sand during the day, emerging only atdusk and dawn to feed. At these times the beach is alive not onlywith the giant crabs, but with their tiny cousins as well. The gi¬ants may also hunt during the day and night.The crab exists only on the most basic instinctive level, and is in¬terested solely in survival. Crabs mate in the autumn and males at¬tempt to mate with as many females as they can. Females bury theireggs in the sand, The eggs hatch the following spring; few hatchlingssurvive to reach maturity Nature has forced the giant crabs to be¬come flexible eaters, always willing to try new food sources.Ecology: The giant crab performs a useful ecological functionin keeping the seashores free of large carrion that would other¬wise rot. On I he shore, il is hunted by the ultimate predators—humans and demihumans—for its superb meat and hard chitin-ous shell, which is prized by some for making armor and shields.The crayfish is essentially a freshwater lobster. It has a similarmulti-plated shell, numerous legs, eyes set on stalks, and twx*wicked pincers. The giant crayfish is muddy brown or sand col¬ored, depending upon the color of the river bottom it inhabits.Some say that the giant crayfish, like the lobster, keeps growingas it gets older; certain sages even argue that the giant crayfish isreally the same species as the ordinary' crayfish, merely an ex¬tremely old specimen.Combat: Like the crab, the crayfish prefers to ambush its prey(-2 penalty to opponent's surprise roll). It sits quietly on the riverbottom, waiting, and then rushes forth to seize its food in its pin¬cers. The giant crayfish does not normally represent a danger toadventurers, since it inhabits only deep rivers and spends ail ofits time on the river bottom. It would therefore only attack ad¬venturers who were swimming along the river bottom, and thenonly if they came within its range. An attack by a giant crayfish'spincers inflicts 2d6 points of damage, The crayfish prefers to dragits catch back to its watery lair and eat in peace. Its shell is verytough, giving the creature AC 4.Habitat/Society: The giant crayfish inhabits only wide anddeep rivers, and feeds almost exclusively upon bottom-dwellingfish. Due to its great size, it can easily prey on such fish as stur¬geon, carp, and large eels. It is voracious and spends most of itstime hunting. On the whole it rarely crosses paths with adventur¬ers, but it does compete with river fishermen.Ecology; The giant crayfish is considered a delicacy by othercreatures, which perhaps accounts for its rarity. Nixies especiallyprize the meat of the giant crayfish* Dragon turtles, giant snap¬ping turtles, merrows, giant otters, gar, giant pike, and storm gi¬ants are just some of the monsters that hunt the giant crayfish. Itis very far from being the top predator in its food chain, and mustfight for its survival.
Crypt things are strange undead creatures that sometimes guardtombs, graves, and corpses. There are two types of cryptthings—ancestral and summoned. The former type are "natural"creatures, while the others are called into existence by a wizardor priest of at least 14th level.A crvpt thing looks like nothing more than an animated skele¬ton, save that it is always clothed in a Flowing robe of brown orCombat: A crypt thing exists only to protect the bodies of thosewho have been laid to rest in its lair. It acts only to defend itscrypt, Should grave robbers or vandals seek to enter and profanethe sanctity of its tomb, the crvpt thing becomes instantly ani-A crypt things first line of defense is a powerful variety of tele¬portation, which it can cast once on any given group of adven¬turers. Each of those attacked with this spell must roil aaway from the crypt, DMs should use Lhe following table as aguideline, rolling IdlOQ for each person who fails the savingthrow, but they are free to use their own judgment as well;Those teleported by the crypt thing cannot materialize insidesolid matter, but they do not necessarily arrive at floor level. Par¬ticularly clever crypt things have been known to transport vic¬tims several hundred feet into the air or atop a vast chasm,leaving them to fall to their deaths.Once it has employed this power, a crypt thing attacks byclawing with its skeletal hands for IdS paints of damage.Like ail undead, crypt things are immune to certain spells. It isimpossible to employ a charm , hold, or sleep spell against a cryptthing with any chance of success. Crypt things are harmed bvholy water or holy symbols, as are many tmdead creatures, Themagic that roots them to their lairs is so powerful, in fact, that italso eliminates any chance for priests or paladins to turn them.Habitat Society: Crypt things are not a natural part of ourworld; they have no organized society or culture. They are foundwherever tombs and crypts are located.The most common crypt thing is the summoned variety. By useof a 7th-level spell (see below), any caster capable of employingnecromantic spells can create a crypt thing.Ancestral crypt things are the raised spirits of the dead thathave returned to guard the tombs of their descendants. This hap¬pens only in rare cases {determined by the DM).Ecology: The crypt thing is not a being of this world and, thus,has no proper ecological niche. It is rumored that the powderedmarrow r from a crypt thing s bones can be used to create a potionof unelead controL In addition, anyone who employs the bonesof a crypt thing to manufacture a set of pipes of haunting is 50%likely to create a magical item that imposes a -2 penalty to itsvictims' saving throws and has double normal effectiveness if thesaving throws fail.This spell enables the caster to cause a single dead body to animateand assume the status of a crypt thing. This spell can be cast only inthe tomb or grave area the crypt thing is to protect; the spell requiresthat the caster touch the skull of the subject body. Once animated, thecrypt thing remains until destroyed. Only one crypt thing may guarda given tomb.A successful dispel magic spell returns the crypt thing to its originalunarvimated state. Attempts to restore the crypt thing before this isdone fail for any magic short of a ia£sfi.The reverse of this spell, destroy crypt thing, utterly annihilatesany one such being as soon as it is touched by the caster. The target isallowed a saving throw vs, death magic to avoid destruction
l with +3 bonusBy weaponSee belowSee below75% (see below)A death knight is the horrifying corruption of a paladin or lawfulgood warrior cursed by the gods to its terrible form as punish¬ment for betraying the code of honor it held in life.A death knight resembles a hulking knight, typically tallerthan 6 feet and weighing more than 300 pounds. Its face is ablackened skull covered with shards of shriveled, rotting flesh, Ithas two tiny, glowing orange-red pinpoints for eyes. Its armor isscorched black as if it had been in a fire. The demeanor of a deathknight is so terrifying that even kender have been known to be¬come frightened.A death knight's deep, chilling voice seems to echo from thedepths of a bottomless cavern. A death knight converses in thelanguage it spoke in its former life, as well as up to six additionallanguages.Combat: A death knight retains the fighting skills it had in itsformer life. Since it has little regard for its own safety and anintense hatred of most living creatures, it is an extremely danger¬ous opponent. Still a death knight retains a semblance of thepride it held as a good warrior and tights honorably: It neverambushes opponents from behind, nor does it attack before anopponent has an opportunity to ready his weapon, Surrender isunknown to a death knight, and it will parley only if it senses itsopponent has crucial information (such as the fate of a formerfamily member).A death knight has a strength of 18(00). It usually attacks witha sword; 50% of the time, this is a magical sword. When a magi¬cal sword is Indicated, roll ld6 and consult the following table;A death knight wears the same armor it wore in its previous life,but regardless of the quality of the armor, it always has an AC of0. Hit points for a death Knight are determined by rolling 10-sided dice.A death knight's magical abilities make it especially danger¬ous, It constantly generates fear in a Moot radius, and it can castdefect magic, detect invisibility t and wall of ice at will Twice perday it can cast dispel magic. Once per day it can use eitherpower word, blind . power word, kill or power word. stun. Itcan also cast symbol of fear or symbol of pain once per day, aswell as a 20-dice fireball once per day, All of its magical spellsfunction at the 20th level of ability.A death knight cannot be turned, but it can be dispelled byholy word spell. It has the power over undead of a bth-level evilpriest. Its magic resistance is 75%, and if an 11 or lower is rolledon the percentile roll, the spell is reflected back at the caster (themagic resistance is rerolled each time a spell is cast at a deathknight),Ha bit at'Society: Death knights are former good warriors whowere judged by the gods to be guilty of unforgivable crimes, suchas murder or treason. (For instance, Krynns Lord Soth, the mostfamous of all death knights, murdered his wife so that he couldcontinue an affair with an elf maid.) Death knights are cursed toremain in their former domains, usually castles or other strong¬holds. They are further condemned to remember their crime insong on any night when the moon is full few sounds are as terri¬fying as a death knight's chilling melody echoing through themoonlit countryside. Death knights are likely to attack any crea¬ture that interrupts their songs or trespasses in their domains.Ecology: Death knights have no physiological functions. Theyare sometimes accompanied by skeleton warriors, liches, andother undead who serve as their aides.
3-12 *3 (bites)/2-5 (slap) *3or by weapon type * 3See belowSee below77%Deepspawn are infamous horrors who give birth to many othervarieties of monsters: a single Deepspawn can make a vast areadangerous, even for alert, well-armed adventurers.Deepspawn look like targe, rubbery spheres of mottled greyand brown. Six arms project from their bodies; three are tentacle-arms, and three are jaw-arms, ending in mouths of many teeth, ADeepspawn also has over 40 long, retractable, flexible eye stalksit extends only three or four at a time, well away from harm.Combat: When found, Deepspawn are usually half buried in apile of slippery, shifting coins and other treasure. This may con¬ceal their arms, so that tentacles and mouths erupting from thetreasure may at first seem to be the attacks of separate monsters.The treasure may hamper opponents and even shield the Deep¬spawn from some damage (as determined by the DM).A Deepspawn attacks by casting hold spells at intruders, cast¬ing spells once every three rounds. Victims under a hold spell aregripped by tentacle-arms and constricted, as other tentacles fightoff other intruders by wielding weapons—including any magicalitems usable by fighters. Deepspawn love to engage prey withweapons, and then bite them from behind with a jaw^arm.A tentacle-arm can slap for ld4 + l points of damage, graspitems or beings and move them about (with 17 Strength), wielddelicate keys or weapons, or constrict victims.Constriction requires a successful attack roll (automatic if thevictim is under a hold spell), and does ld4 points of damage, plusld4 +1 points per round thereafter, In any round in which a beinggets free, it takes only 1 point of constriction damage. Constrict¬ed victims can be swung about as bludgeons—doing ld2 damageto any others struck, ruining spellcasting, and forcing savingthrows on fragile items. This action causes the constricted victimno extra damage unless driven onto points or blades (determinedamage on a case-by-case basis).Victims may only escape constriction by severing the tentacle-arm or tearing free. Tentade-arms release their victims if severed.Each arm has 2 HD: severing occurs if damage equal to half atentacle-arms hit points is dealt in a concentrated area by edgedor pointed weapons. To tear Free, roll a d20 for both the victimand the Deepspawn on each round of constriction, adding theirrespective strengths (17 for the Deepspawn). If the victim has thehigher total, it wins its freedom.Deepspawn can also cast ESP and water breathing at will, andmay employ a heal spell (self only), once a day. If a Deepspawn slife is threatened, it hurls caches of seized weapons as missiles,unleashes any magical items it has, and tries to escape by aplanned route. Deepspawn seem immune to all known venoms,and regenerate lost arms and stalks r though slowly healing 2 hpper day,Habitat/Society: Deepspawn prefer to let their offspring fight forthem. Their lairs are in caverns, dungeons, or ruins and are am¬ply protected by traps and guardian monsters (their spawn"). 1Jthese defenses are penetrated, the Deepspawn will usually befound in a readily-defended room or den, and it will always haveat least one or more escape routes,Deepspawn are native to the Deeps, and have successfully re¬sisted attempts by dwarves, drew, duergar, cloakers, illithids,and aboleth to exterminate them. Deepspawn seldom make theirlairs within 30 miles of each other, but individuals may be muchcloser together underground, on different levels.Ecology: Deepspawn will eat anything organic, but prefer freshmeat. By some unexplained, natural means, Deepspawn can' grow ' and give birth to any creature native to the Prime Materi¬al plane it has ever devoured (but not undead or other dual di¬mensional creatures). The "spawn" have the natural attacks,magical abilities, alignment, and intelligence of their creators.Class abilities and other learned skills are not passed on to them.A spawn "grows" in Id4 days (varying with size and complexity)in a Deepspawn, which must ingest meat, vegetable matter, andwater or blood to fuel the ’"birth". The Deepspawn then opensand ejects a fully active spawn. Spawn are never hostile towardstheir parent, and cannot be made to attack them even by magicalmeans. Spawn can attack or defend themselves within one roundof emerging. At the DM's option, they may use certain powers orabilities clumsily for a few rounds.
Dinosaurs are found on alternate planes of existence, or even onlost continents. The frequency figures given are for areas wheredinosaurs are normally found; in all other places, they are veryrare at best. All dinosaurs in this entry share the following char¬acteristics:Dinosaurs, or "terrible lizards" are reptiles descended from an¬cestral reptiles called thecodonts* The two types of dinosaurs aresaurischians ("lizard-hipped*') and ornithischians ("bird-hipped'), named for terms describing their pelvic structures.Within the saurischia are the carnivorous therapods, representedhere by tyrannosaurus, and the herbivorous sauropods, repre¬sented here by diplodocus* Saurischians also include ornithomi-mosaurs and the related dmmaeosaurs, represented here bydeinonychus.Many ornithischians have armor, horns, or both, They includeceratopsians, represented by triceratops: omithopods, such asthe hadrosaurs, represented by the lambeosaurus; ankylosaurus;and stegosaurus.Dinosaurs come in many sizes and shapes. Those presentedhere are generally large. Bigger species have drab colors, whilesmaller dinosaurs have a wide variety of markings. Mosi dino¬saurs have a skin which is pebbly in texture: some closely relatedspecies of reptile have fur, and some may have feathers.Combat: Dinosaurs seem to be a mixture of endothermic ("warm¬blooded") and exothermic ("cold-blooded"). They regulate bodytemperature internally, but also depend on external heat some¬what. Though they may be slow on a cold morning, they maynot be as slow as a typical reptile.Most of these huge reptiles have comparatively small brains,but many of the predators are quite cunning* All must eat largeamounts of food to maintain their huge bodies. As a result,sauropods eat almost constantly and carnivores hunt almostconstantly and also eat carrion*Though the carnivores are both voracious and ferocious, cer¬tain plant eaters are very aggressive in their defense, usually witharmor or horns, lust because they do not eat meat does not meanthey will not kill other animals*Habitat/Society: Dinosaurs can be found in almost any type ofenvironment, except desert, high mountains, and frozen wastes.They have no society and little family life, with most speciesabandoning eggs before they hatch*Ecology: Sages do not understand what has made dinosaurs ex¬tinct on certain worlds, but they do exist in the "lost lands" onseveral worlds. There may be places where dinosaurs have con¬tinued to evolve into different forms: they may be ancestors ofmodem lizard men,This armadillo-like ornithischian weighs four or five tons, mostof this weight being its armor plating, side spines, and great,knobbed tail. If attacked or threatened, this creature lashes outwith its tail, delivering blows of considerable force.A related species is the paleocinthus, which has better plating(AC -3) and a spiked, rather than dub-like, tail*This fast carnivore uses its speed, its long, grasping forearms,large teeth, and hind legs with their ripping talons in terriblecombination. It hunts by running at prey, leaping, and rakingwith its rear daws as it claws and bites. The jump is a charge, sothe creature gains a +2 on attack rolls* The rear talons count asonly one attack, and cause a total of 2d6 damage. When attack¬ing a larger creature, the deinonychus often jumps on Lop of it,and holds on with its front daws while continuing to rake withthe rear daws, The deinonychus has a relatively large brain for adinosaur, and its pack hunts with cunning tactics.Despite being 12 leet long, this dinosaur is only about 6 feeltall. Its tail extends straight out behind it, held aloft by an intri¬cate structure of bony supports, thus allowing its 150 pounds ofweight to be carried entirely by the back legs.The deinonychus is a dromaeosaur dinosaurs which are re¬lated to ornithomimosaurs: its distant relatives include thechicken-sized night hunter, compsognathus, and the ostrich-likestruthiomimus. Neither is as formidable as the deinonychus.This sauropod lives primarily on water plants, so is often foundin or near lakes and marshes* It and related species can also befound on fern prairies and in open forests. It weighs about 10tons. Though it usually ignores small things, it can step on any¬thing in its way, or even rear up and come down on threateningcreatures: this trampling causes 3dl0 damage. The diplodotusRelated species include the huge brachiosaurus, which weighsabout 90 tons and averages 75 feet in length. It causes SdlO dam¬age when trampling.The elasmosaurus looks like a snake with fins and a thick body. Itis aggressive, attacking anything it notices. Its neck makes upone-half its total length. The creature is strong, fast, and highlymaneuverable, able to turn quickly and lunge at prey. Whenhunting, the elasmosaurus travels with its head out of the water,snapping down quickly to seize prey.This creatures relatives include many other types of ple¬siosaurs and pliosaurs. Females travel onto sandy beaches to laytheir eggs in shallow depressions.This is a very common ' duck-billed rf dinosaur, bipedal, with aflat snout, and crests on its head. A peaceful herbivore, this ha-drosaur prefers to run from attack: its only defense is its lashingtail. It has excellent senses, used to detect predators.Its enemies include most carnivores. Related species includemany other species of duck-billed dinosaurs, as well as the ig-uanodon, The latter has sharp thumb spikes which can cause 1-3damage each, in addition to its tail attack.Although this flying reptile typically dives for marine prey, it at¬tacks any creature that appears to be vulnerable. The pteranodonhas no teeth, but spears victims with its beak if they are too largeto swallow at a gulp. The beak of a typical pteranodon is about Afeet long.Despite the creatures huge wingspan, its wings are very light,and its furred body is only a little larger than a human being; thewhole weighs only about 50 pounds. A pteranodon can carry offprey up to four times its own weight.There are all sizes of related species; close relatives have crestson their heads to balance their long beak for flight.Another of the omithischlans, the stegosaurus, or ' plated lizard,"is a large, stupid, herbivorous dinosaur with aggressive defenses.It thrives nearly anywhere and is often found on plains or in jun¬gles.A stegosaurus is about 5 feet tall at the middle of its back; itshumped spine is lined with a double row of leaf-shaped plateswhich help the creature absorb and dissipate heat. The creaturehas a spiked tail, with four or more bony spikes of up to 3 feet inlength. An enlarged spinal node helps relay commands to the tailand rear legs. The stegosaurus continually turns its posterior to¬wards an enemy, while tucking its head low. ft reacts in the samemanner if anything near seems threatening.Similar species include the dacentrus, which has spikes alongits backbone instead of plates, and the kentrosaurus, which hasbony plates along the front half of its spine, and spikes along therear half. All have spiked tails.The largest of the ceratopsians, or horn-faced dinosaurs, and byFar the most aggressive, this beaked herbivore is a plains-d wellerIt has a huge front plate of bone protecting its 6-foot-long head,from which project two great horns (each over 3 feet long), whilea shorter horn juts from its nose. The head and neck are AC 2; itsbody is not armored, so is AC 6. The Lnceratops weighs just over10 tons.Any creature that infringes on the territory of these reptiles islikely to be charged and skewered. Smaller creatures are tram¬pled, suffering 2dl2 points of damage. The triceratops also usesits horns in fights for dominance within the herd, so it is not unu¬sual to find specimens with past injuries on their heads.Related species have the same bony plate which protects theirnecks, as well as different numbers of horns. The monocloniushas a single nose-hom; the pentaceratops has three true horns,like the triceratops, plus hom-iike protrusions jutting from itscheeks; and the stvracosaurus has a frill of horns located aroundthe edge of its neck-plate.This ravenous creature is one of the most fearsome and terrible ofall carnivorous dinosaurs. Despite its huge size and eight-tonweight, the monster is a swift runner, Its huge head is nearly 6feet long, and its teeth are from 3 to 6 inches in length.Tyrannosaurus rex, the “tyrant lizard king," is a plains dweller,and so relentlessly and stupidly fierce that it will attack a smalltriceratops. kill it, and swallow its head in one gulp—thus killingitself in a matter of hours as the horns of the victim pierce thestomach of the victor.This dinosaur's favorite food is any hadrosaur, such as thetrachodon. The monster pursues and eats nearly anything; crea¬tures of man-size or smaller are swallowed whole on a naturalattack roll of 18 or higher. The tyrannosaurus also eats carrion,chasing away any smaller creatures to steal a meal found with itskeen sense of smell.There are many other species of camosaur, some smaller andfaster than tyrannosaurus. Some have stronger arms and moredangerous upper claws.
The displacer beast is a magical creature that resembles a pumawith two powerful black tentacles growing from its shoulders.Very rare, they stay far from human habitations.The displacer beast has the blue-black coloring of a dark pan¬ther, and a long cat-like body and head. Females range in lengthfrom 8 to 9 feet, and weigh 450 pounds; males are 10 to 12 feellong, and weigh up to 500 Lbs, They have 6 legs. Tentacles aretipped with rough homy edges that can inflict terrible wounds.Their eyes glow bright green, even after death.Combat: The displacer beast is a fierce, savage creature thathates all forms of life. Highly aggressive, the displacer beast willattack on sight, using its tentacles to inflict 2-8 f2<i4] points ofdamage to its victims.Their main advantage in combat is their magical power of dis¬placement which allows them to appear to be some 3 feet fromtheir actual location, Anyone attacking a displacer beast does soat on his attack roll. In addition, the beasts save as 12th-levelfighters: adding +2 to their die rolls.To determine the true position of the displacer beast and itsillusion, roll ldlQ. On 1-5, the illusion is in front of the creature,6-7 to the creature's left, 8-9, to the right. On 10, the illusion isbehind the beasts actual position. Although this ability is magi¬cal the beast s location can not be determined by dispel or detectmagic. Only true seeing will reveal its position.Displacer beasts will not use their claws or teeth unless neardeath, or when in combat with a very large opponent. If they doemploy them, each claw does 1-3 points of damage, and each bitedoes 1-8 points of damage.Displacer beasts mate m the autumn, and the young are bornin spring. A mated pair of displacer beasts makes its home in acave, producing Utters of 1-4 young. The cubs, about the size ofdomestic cats, are bom without tentacles and reach maturity,though not full size, within 4 months. They remain in the caveuntil their displacement abilities are fully developed. This is fol¬lowed by a two month period during which the cubs are taughthow to hunt. When this is completed, the family group disbandsand the monsters wander off to join separate packs.While raising young, the monsters are fiercely protective of theirlairs. One adult always remains with the cubs, usually the fe¬male, while the other goes off to hunt. Dead prey is dragged backto the lair to be eaten by the family Lairs are littered with thebones, equipment, and the treasures of its victims.Naturally vicious and almost evil at times, displacer beastsharbor an undying hatred of blink dogs. Many theories attemptto account for this enmity Some sages believe it springs from an¬tipathy in temperaments—the lawful good blink dog would nat¬urally be the enemy of a creature as savage and destructive as thedisplacer beast, Others argue that it is the displacement and blinkabilities which cause this antipathy “the two abilities, when inclose proximity somehow stimulate the nervous system and pro¬duce hostile reactions. Encounters between the two breeds areHabitat, Society Displacer beasts are carnivores. Unless they areraising young, they usually run in packs, carving a savage swathof destruction as they go. They hate all life, and will sometimeskill purely for pleasure. Fierce and vicious as they are, however,displacer beasts never fight among themselves. The pack is awell-run and highly efficient killing machine. When encounteredin packs, displacer beasts are more than a match for many largecreatures and have been known to make a meal of ores, goblins,and bands of men. Any creature entering their territory is viewedas potential preyrare however, since they do not share the same territory.Ecology: Displacer beasts have little to fear from other largepredators, save perhaps trolls or giants. Some wizards and alche¬mists value their hides for use in certain magical preparations,and will offer generous rewards for them. The eyes of a displacerbeast are a highly prized, if uncommon, good luck charmsamong thieves who believe that they will protect the bearer fromdetection.
Smaller than wolves, the appearance of the wild dog varies fromplace to place. Most appear very wotf-like. while others seem to com¬bine the looks of a wolf and a jackal,Combat: Wild dogs fight as an organized pack. They favor smallgame, and attack men and human habitations only in times of greathunger. The bite of a wild dog inflicts 1-4 points of damage.Habitat Society: Wild dogs arc found almost anywhere. They runin packs, and are led by the dominant male. The pack usually hunts avariety of game, even attacking deer or antelope. Pups are bom inthe spring. Wild dogs can be tamed if separated from their pack.Ecology : Wild dogs are omnivores which usually thrive on a com¬bination of hunting and foraging*Generally large mastiffs or wolfhounds, they have keen senses ofsmell and hearing, making them adept at detecting intruders. Mostwar dogs are not usually vicious, and will rarely attack withoutcause,The status of war dogs varies greatly: some are loyal and belovedpets, some are watch dogs others are hunting dogs, and some aretrained for battle.Blink dogs are yellowish brown canines which are stockier and moremuscular than other wild dogs. They are intelligent and employ alimited form of teleportation when they hunt,A blink dog attack is well organized. They will blink to and frowithout any obvious pattern, using their powers to position them-selves tor an attack. Fully 75% of the time they are able to attacktheir targets from the rear, A dog will teleport on a roll of 7 or betteron a 12-sided die. To determine where the dog appears, roll a 12-sideddie: 1 = in front of opponent, 2 = shielded (or left) front flank, 3 =unshielded (or right! front flank, 4-12 = behind. When blinking, thedog will appear from 1 to 3 feet from its opponent and will immedi¬ately be able to attack.Blinking is an innate power and the animal will never appear insidea space occupied by a solid object. If seriously threatened, the entirepack will blink out and not return.Blink dogs are intelligent, and communicate in a complex languageof barks, yaps, whines, and growls. They inhabit open plains andavoid human haunts. A lair will contain 3-12 (3d4) pups 50% of thetime (1-2 hit dice, 1-2/1-3 hit points damage/attack). These puppiescan be trained and are worth between 1,000 to 2,000 gold pieces.Death dogs are large two-headed hounds which are distinguished bytheir penetrating double bark. Death dogs hunt in large packs.Each head is independent, and a bite does 1-10 points of damage.Victims must save vs. poison or contract a rotting disease which willkill them in 4-24 (4d6) days. Only a cure disease spell can save them.A natural roll of 19 or 20 on their attack die means that a man-sizedopponent is knocked prone and attacks at a -4 until able to rise to itsfeet again, There is an S5% chance that death dogs will attack hu*mans on sight.
Often mistaken for baneful monsters, moon dogs are native crea¬tures of Elysium and champions of the causes of good. They of¬ten appear in the Prime Material plane to fight evil wherever itshows itself.Moon dogs look very similar to large Wolf hounds. Theirstrange heads are slightly human in appearance, giving the ani¬mals a very intelligent look. The creatures forepaws are adapt¬able, giving the moon dogs the ability to travel bipedally or on allfours. They are dark colored animals, ranging from dark gray todeep black. Moon dogs have amber eyes.Moon dogs speak their own language, and they can communi¬cate with all canines and lupines as well. They can speak com¬mon using a limited form of telepathy.Combat: Woe to those who enter combat with a moon dog.These creatures of good are potenL fighters and merciless againstevil. Their powerful bite inflicts 3-12 points of damage.Moon dogs prefer to attack with their keening howk This bay¬ing is harmful to evil creatures only. Any evil creature within an80 foot radius of a hmymg moon dog is affected as by a fear spellcast at I2th-level of magic use. Additional moon dogs bayinghave a cumulative effect. The howlmg will also cause 5-8 pointsof damage per round to evil creatures within 40 feet. In addition,the hoxultug will cause intense physical pain to extra-planar crea¬tures of evil alignment so much that they are 5% likely per moondog howling to return to their plane. Moon dogs can whine todispel illusions or bark to dispel evil, once per round.The following spell-like powers (at 12th-!evel of use) are avail¬able to a moon dog one at a time, once per round, at will:• cure disease, by lick, I time per individual per day• cure light wounds, by lick, 1 time per individual per day• slow poison, by lick, 1 time per individual per dayMoon dogs can become ethereal and have the ability to travelin the ethereal and Astral plane at will. They have superior visionequal to double normal vision, including 60' infravision. Com¬bined with an unusually keen sense oF smell and hearing, thisgrants moon dogs the detection abilities listed above, plus theability to detect all illusions. Association with a moon dog lorone hour or more removes charms and acts as a remove curse.When in shadowy light, a moon dog is able to move in such away as to effectively create magic equal to a hypnotic pattern ofshadows. Only evil creatures will be affected. At the same time,each creature of good within the area will effectively gain a pro¬tection from evil and remove fear spell benefit. Moon dogs maynot attack or perform any other action when weaving this pat¬tern of shadows. It requires one full round to weave and extendsto a range of 50 feet. The moon dog can dispel magic, but doingso will force it back to its own plane immediately.Moon dogs may be damaged only by +2 or better magicalweapons. They are never surprised (due to their keen senses) andcause opponents to subtract 3 from their surprise rolls. Moondogs are immune to fear spells. They make all saving throws at a+ 2 bonus and takes half or quarter damage.Habitat Sodetyr Moon dogs are native to the plane of Elysium,They are champions of good and will often travel about the up¬per planes and the Prime Material plane to challenge evil.Moon dogs are friendly to all good and neutral races and thosefriendly to those races. They will not long associate with anyonebecause they are constantly on the move, hunting evil.Ecology: Moon dogs will often communicate with communitiesof men, using telepathy, in order to locate trouble spots amongthem.
While all dolphins share a variety of common traits, the spe¬cies comes in a variety of shapes and sizes. Their long, compactbodies are superbly adapted to the aquatic environment, and dol¬phins are among the most powerful swimmers in the oceans. Allbreeds of dolphins have a large tin on their backs, two flippers, apowerful tail jaws filled with many sharp teeth, a blow hole, andare 5 to b feet long. Most common and well-known are the gray,or bottle-nosed dolphins, so named for their gray skin and bottle¬shaped snouts. Other varieties have two-toned blue and gray col¬oring. The species communicates through an intricate speechconsisting of high-pitched sounds, some out of the range of hu¬man hearing.Combat: Inherently peaceful, dolphins will generally attack on¬ly if threatened. Unless outnumbered 2 to 1, dolphins always at¬tack sharks. Whether attacking a foe or defending their school,dolphins fight as an organized unit, responding to commandsfrom their leader. They fight with special vehemence to protecttheir young, and a select number of dolphins may sometimes en¬gage in a holding action, sacrificing themselves so that the re¬mainder of the school can swim to safety,Hahit.il/Society: Dolphins are completely carnivorous, living ona diet of fish. Though they can remain submerged for severalminutes at a time, they must surface regularly to breathe. Unlikemost mammals, breathing is a conscious, rather than uncon¬scious action on the part of dolphins: in other words, they liter¬ally must remember to breathe. Newborn dolphins are assisted tothe surface to breathe by their mothers and a female dolphin mid¬wife. Dolphins are by nature playful good-tempered, and lawfulgood, despising evil creatures. Most roam the oceans in schools,numbering as large as 20 dolphins, swimming where their fancysuits them. They never fight among themselves or with otherbreeds of dolphins. Dolphins are famous for the great pleasurethey take in life: when swimming they often perform dazzlingaquatic stunts, leaping in and out of the water in a spectacularfashion. They will also play with objects that they find and enjoygames. Dolphins sometimes follow ships, entertaining the crewsand passengers with their antics.About 10% of all dolphins live in organized communities.These groups have ld4 + l swordfish (AC 6, move 24, 1+1 HitDice, 2d6 points of damage/attack) or 1-3 narwhales (AC 6,move 21, 4+4 Hit Dice, 2dl2 points of damage/attack) asguards, depending on the climatic region, tf a community isfound, there is a 75% possibility that there are ld4 additionalcommunities of dolphins within a five-mile radius. These orga^nized communities of dolphins do not tolerate the presence ofevil sea creatures in their domain, and if necessary enlist the aidot nomadic schools of dolphins to drive out evil creatures. Anyregion inhabited by dolphin communities is also shark and killerwhale free.Dolphins are highly intelligent and take a benign distant inter¬est in human doings, They will always help humans in distress,guiding them to the shore and keeping the sharks at bay. Certainsolitary dolphins, known as rogues, have been known to formcloser attachments to humans, accompanying them in a friendlyfashion on swimming and fishing expeditions. These rogues oftenplay dolphin games with their human companions. Dolphins arefar more valuable to men in other respects. Friendly dolphinshave warned sailors of the approach of pirate ships and the inten¬tions of evil sea creatures. More than one ship owes its safe arriv¬al in port to the timely intercession and warning of dolphins.They have come to men s aid when their ships were attacked bymermen and sahuagin. Dolphins have been known to raid sa-huagtn communities and destroy their eggs, for dolphins perceivethese monsters as a threat to their safety.Ecology: The dolphin is both a hunter and hunted in its marineworld. Sharks and other large evil sea creatures hunt the dolphinwith enthusiasm. Despite its many enemies, the dolphin hasmany distinct advantages Lhat enable it to survive and evenflourish. Not only is it a strong, swift swimmer, but its intelli¬gence and organized lifestyle are highly effective defenses againstits enemies.
The doppleganger is a master of mimicry that survives by takingthe shapes of men, derm humans, and humanoids.Dopplegangers are bipedal and generally humanoid in appear¬ance. Their bodies are covered with a thick, hairless gray hide,which gives them a natural AC of 5. They are. however, rarelyseen in their true forms.Combat: This monster is able to assume the shape of any hu¬manoid creature between four and eight feet high. The dopple¬ganger chooses a victim, duplicates his form, and then attemptsto kill ihe original and assume his place. The doppleganger is ableto use ESP and can imitate its victim with 90% accuracy, evenduplicating the victims clothing and equipment. If unsuccessfulin taking its victim s place, the doppleganger attacks, relying onthe ensuing confusion to make it indistinguishable from its vic¬tim. A doppleganger is immune to sleep and charm spells androlls all saving throws as if he was a lOlh-level fighter,Dopplegangers work in groups and act together to ensure thattheir attacks and infiltrations are successful. They are very intel¬ligent and usually take the time to plan their attacks with care. Ifa group of the monsters spots some potential victims, the dopple¬gangers often trail their targets* wailing for a good chance tostrike, choosing their time and opportunity with care. They maywait until nightfall, or until their victims are alone, or even fol¬low them to an inn.Habitat Society; Dopplegangers are rumored to be artificial be¬ings that were created long ago by a powerful wizard or godllng.They were originally intended to be used as spies and assassins inan ancient, highly magical wan Their creator died long ago, butthey live on, still working as spies for evil powers, thieves, andgovernment, They have even been known to work as assassins.All dopplegangers belong to a single tribe. Although this israre, groups of dopplegangers can be found anywhere at anytime, and in unexpected locations. Working as a unit, they selecta group of victims, such as a family or a group of travelers. Basi¬cally lazy dopplegangers find it easier to survive and live com¬fortably by taking humanoid, and especially human, shape*They prefer to take the form of someone comfortably providedfor, and shun assuming the form of hardworking peasants. Sincethey are only 90% accurate in their mimicry, most dopplegangersare eventually discovered and driven out, and then forced oncemore to assume a new shape.Dopplegangers are found most often in their true forms in adungeon or in the wilderness. Groups often set up a lair in anarea well-suited to ambush and surprise, patrolling a regular ter¬ritory. These bands make a good living by attacking weak hu¬manoid monsters or travelers and stealing their food andtreasure. If food and treasure are scarce, they hire out to a power¬ful wizard or thieves' guild.A doppleganger who has been hired to replace a specific per¬son will plan its attack with special care, learning as much aboutthe victim and his environment as it can.The dopplegangers' weaknesses are greed and cowardice. Theyspend their lives in avid pursuit of gold and other wealth. If at¬tacking a group of adventurers, for example, they often choosethe richest-lookmg one to attack first. If they target a party ofadventurers, the dopplegangers wait until the party is on the wayout of the dungeon and heading back to town. Since they arecowardly however, they prefer to take the easiest route towardriches. A doppleganger who chooses a rich adventurer avoidsrisks once the treasure is safely in hand, and retreats at the earli¬est opportunity, making some plausible excuse for separatingfrom the human members of the group, They sometimes hire outas spies and assassins for money as well.Ecology: Dopplegangers are sophisticated and dangerous para¬sites, living off the labors of others. They must also be reckonedwith as clever and effective spies and assassins who can wreakpolitical mayhem in positions of power. Evil wizards have onrare occasions controlled entire kingdoms for short periods oftime by replacing a king, prince, or councilor with a dopple¬ganger.
As per former dragon typeAs per former dragon typeAs per former dragon typeAs per former dragon typeSee belowBreath weapon and spell useSpell immunities and spell useSee belowAs per individual dragon, plus l r OOG(both dracolich and host must bedestroyed)The dracolich is an undead creature resulting from the unnaturaltransformation of an evil dragon* The mysterious Cult of theDragon practices the powerful magic necessary for the creation ofthe dracolich, though other practitioners are also rumored to exist.A dracolich can be created from any of the evil dragon sub¬species. A dracolich retains the physical appearance of Us originalbody, except that its eyes appear as glowing points of light FloatingIn shadowy eye sockets. Skeletal or semi-skeletaJ dracoliehes havebeen observed on occasion.The senses of a dracolich are similar to those of its original form:it can detect invisible objects and creatures (including those hiddenin darkness of fog) within a LO-foot radius per age category andalso possesses a natural clairaudience ability while in its lair equalto a range of 20 feet per age category. A dracolich can speak, castspells, and employ the breath weapon of its original form; it cancast each of its spells once per day and can use its breath weapononce every three combat rounds. Additionally a dracolich retainsthe intelligence and memory' of its original form.Combat: Dracoliehes are immune to charm, sleep , enfeeble-ment, polymorph, cold (magical or natural), electricity, hold , in¬sanity, and death spells or symbok . They cannot be poisoned,paralyzed, or turned by priests. They have the same magic resist¬ance as their original forms; only magical attacks from wizardsof 6th level or higher, or from monsters of 6 or more Hit Dicehave a chance of affecting dracoliehes.The Armor Class of a dracolich is equal to the Armor Class ofits original form, bettered by —2 (for example, if the AC of theoriginal form was — 1. the AC of the dracolich is “3). Attacks ona dracolich, due to its magical nature, do not gain any attack ordamage roll bonuses.Initially a dracolich has the same morale rating as its originalForm. However, after a dracolich is successful in its first battle, itsmorale rating permanently becomes Fearless (19 base); this as¬sumes that the opponent or opponents involved in the battle hada Hit Dice total of at least 100% of the Hit Dice of the dracolich(for instance, a 16-HD dracolich must defeat an opponent or op¬ponents of at least 16 total HD to receive the morale increase)*Once a dracolich receives the morale increase, it becomes im¬mune to magical fear as well.The dracolich has a slightly stronger ability to cause tear in oppo¬nents than it did in its original form: opponents must roll their sav¬ing throws vs* spell with a — 1 penalty (in addition to any otherrelevant modifiers) to resist the dracolich's fear aura. The gaze of thedracolich's glowing eyes can also paralyze creatures within 40 yardsif they fail their saving throws (creatures of 6th level |or 6 Hit Dice]or higher gain a +3 bonus to their saving throw's), [f a creature suc¬cessfully saves against the gaze of a dracolich, it is permanently im¬mune to the gaze of that particular dracolich.The attack routine of a dracolich is similar to that of its origi¬nal form; for example, a dracolich that w T as originally a greendragon will bring down a weak opponent with a series of physi¬cal attacks, but it will stalk more formidable opponents, attack¬ing at an opportune moment with its breath weapon and spells.All physical attacks, such as clawing and biting, inflict thesame damage as the dracolich's original form, plus 2dS points ofchilling damage, A victim struck by a dracolich who fails a sav¬ing throw vs, paralyzation is paralyzed for 2d6 rounds. Immu¬nity to cold damage, temporary or permanent, negates thechilling damage but not the paralyzation, Dracoliehes cannotdrain life levels.All dracoliehes can attempt undead control (as per a potion ofundead control ) once every three days on any variety of undeadwith 60 yards. The undead's saving throws against this powersuffer a -3 penalty; if the undead control is successful, it lasts forone turn only. While undead control is in use, the dracolich can¬not use other spells* If the dracolich interrupts its undead controlbefore it has been used for a full turn, the dracolich must still waitIf a dracolich or proto-draco lie h is slain, its spirit immediatelyreturns to its host. If there is no corpse in range for it to possess,the spirit is trapped in the host until such a time—if ever—that acorpse becomes available. A dracolich is difficult to destroy. Itcan be destroyed outright by power word , kd/ or a similar spell.If its spirit is currently contained in its host, destroying the hostwhen a suitable corpse is not within range eff ectively destroys thedracolich. Likewise, an active dracolich is unable to attempt fur¬ther possessions if its host is destroyed. The fate of a disembodieddracolich spirit—that is, a spirit with no body or host—is un¬known, but it is presumed that it is drawn to the lower planes.
Habital/Sodety: The creation of a dracolich is a complex proc¬ess involving the transformation of an evil dragon by arcanemagical forces, the most notorious practitioners of which aremembers of the Cult of the Dragon. The process is usually a co¬operative effort between the evil dragon and the wizards, but es¬pecially powerful wizards have been known to coerce an evildragon to undergo the transformation against its will.Any evil dragon is a possible candidate for transformation, al¬though old dragons or older with spell-casting abilities are prefer¬red. Once a candidate is secured, the wizards first prepare thedragon's host, an inanimate object that will hold the dragons lifeforce. The host must be a solid item of not less than 2,000 gpvalue resistant to decay (wood, for instance, is unsuitable!. Agemstone is commonly used for a host, particularly ruby, pearl,carbuncle, and jet and is often set in the hilt of a sword or otherweapon. The host is prepared by casting enchant an item upon itand speaking the name of the evil dragon; the item may resist thespell by successfully saving vs. spell as an llth-level wizard. Ifthe spell is resisted, another item must be used for the host. U thespell is not resisted, the item can then function as a host. If de¬sired, glassteel can be cast upon the host to protect it.Next, a special potion is prepared for the evil dragon to con¬sume. The exact composition of the potion varies according tothe age and type of the dragon, but it must contain precisely sev¬en ingredients, among them a potion of evil dragon control apotion of invulnerability, and the blood of a vampire. When theevil dragon consumes the potion, the results are determined asfollows (roil percentile dice);Potion does not work. The dragon suffers 2d 12points of damage and is helpless with convul¬sions for 1-2 rounds.Potion does not work. The dragon dies, A fullwish or similar spell is needed to restore thedragon to life; a wish to transform the dragoninto a dracolich results in another roll on thistable.H the potion ivorks, the dragons spirit transfers to the host, re-gardless of the distance between the dragons body and the host.A dim light within the host indicates the presence of the spirit.While contained in the host, the spirit cannot take any actions; itcannot be contacted nor attacked by magic. The spirit can re¬main in the host indefinitely.Once the spirit is contained in the host the host must bebrought within 90 feet of a reptilian corpse; under no circum¬stances can the spirit possess a living body. The spirits originalbody is ideal, but the corpse of any reptilian creature that died orwas killed within the previous 30 days h suitable.The wizard who originally prepared the host must touch thehost, cast a magic jar spell while speaking the name of the drag¬on, then touch the corpse, The corpse must fail a saving throwvs. spell for the spirit to successfully possess it; if it saves, it willnever accept the spirit. The following modifiers apply to the roll:-10 if the corpse is the spirit s own former body (which can bedead for any length of time)._ 4 if the corpse is of the same alignment as the dragon.-4 if the corpse is that of a true dragon (any type).-3 if the corpse is that of a firedrake, ice lizard, wyvem, orfire lizard.-1 if the corpse is that of a dracolisk, dragonne, dinosaur,snake, or other reptile.If the corpse accepts the spirit, it becomes animated by the spirit.It the animated corpse is the spirit's former body, it immediatelybecomes a dracolich; however, St will not regain the use of itsvoice and breath weapon for another seven days (note that it willnot be able to cast spells with verbal components during thistime). At the end of seven days, the dracolich regains the use ofits voice and breath weapon.If the animated corpse is not the spirit's former body, it imme¬diately becomes a proto-dracolich, A proto-dracolich has themind and memories of its original form, but has the hit pointsand immunities to spells and priestly turning of a dracolich. Aproto-dracolich can neither speak nor cast spells: further, it can¬not cause chilling damage, use a breath weapon, or cause fear asa dracolich. Its strength, movement, and Armor Class are thoseof the possessed body.To become a full dracolich, a proto-dracolich must devour atleast 10% of its original body, Unless the body has been dis¬patched to another plane of existence, a proto-dracolich can al¬ways sense the presence of its original body, regardless of thedistance, A proto-dracolich will tirelessly seek out its originalbody to the exclusion of all other activities, If its original bodyhas been burned, dismembered, or otherwise destroyed, theproto-dracolich need only devour the ashes or pieces equal to orexceeding 10% of its original body mass (total destruction of theoriginal body is possible only through use of a disintegrate orsimilar spell; the body could be reconstructed with a uhsli or sim¬ilar spell, so long as the spell is cast in the same plane as the disin¬tegration). U a proto-dracolich is unable to devour its originalbody it is trapped in its current form until slain.A proto-dracolich transforms into a full dracolich within sevendays after it devours its original body. When the transformationis complete, the dracolich resembles its original body; it can nowspeak, cast spells, and employ the breath weapon of its originalbody, in addition to having all of the abilities of a dracolich.The procedure for possessing a nevv corpse is the same as ex¬plained above, except that the assistance of a wizard is no longernecessary (casting magic jar is required only for the first posses¬sion). If the spirit successfully rc-possesses its original body, itonce again becomes a full dracolich If the spirit possesses a dif¬ferent body, it becomes a proto-dracolich and must devour itsformer body to become a full dracolich,A symbiotic relationship exists between a dracolich and thewizards who create it. The wizards honor and aid their dracolich,as well as providing it with regular offerings of treasure items. Inreturn, the dracolich defends its wizards against enemies and oth¬er threats, as well as assisting them in their various schemes. Likedragons, dracoliches are loners, but they take comfort in theknowledge that they have allies,Dracoliches are generally found in the same habitats as thedragons from which they w'ere created; dracoliches created fromgreen dragons, for instance, are likely to be found in subtropicaland temperate forests. Though they do not live with their wiz¬ards, their lairs are never more than a few miles away. Draco¬liches prefer darkness and are usually encountered at night, inshadowy forests, or in underground labyrinths.Ecology; Dracoliches are never hungry, but they must eat m or¬der to refuel their breath weapons. Like dragons, dracoliches canconsume nearly anything, but prefer the food eaten by their orig¬inal forms (for instance, if a dracolich was originally a red drag¬on, it prefers fresh meat). The body of a destroyed dracolichcrumbles into a foul-smelling powder within a lew hours; thispowder can be used by knowledgeable wizards as a componentfor creating potions of undead control and similar magical sub¬stances.Dragons are an ancient, winged reptilian race. They are known ant!feared for their size, physical prowess and magical abilities. The oldestdragons are among the most powerful creatures in the world. Most drag¬ons are identified by the color of their scales.There are many know subspecies of dragons, several of which fall intothree broad categories: chromatic, gem. and metallic dragons. Chromaticdragons include black, blue, green, red, and white dragons: all are ex¬tremely evil and are feared by most, The metallic dragons are the brass,bronze, copper, gold and silver dragons; these are noble and good, high¬ly respected by wise people.The gem dragons are the amethyst, crystal, emerald, sapphire, and to¬paz dragons; they are neutral with respect to good and evil and are verycharismatic and suave, masters of persuasion who delight in riddles.Though generally smaller and dower than other dragons, gem dragonsare often wiser and more intelligent, and have other powers to compen¬sate. like psionics.In addition to the dragons in these three classifications, there are otherdragons that may at first seem to be members of those categories. Forinstance, the steel dragon seems to be a metallic dragon, but has only onebreath weapon; white each true" metallic dragon has two. Likewise, thebrown dragon seems to be a typical, evil chromatic dragon; but has nowings, so is not a true" chromatic dragon.Although all subspecies of dragons are believed to have come from thesame roots tens of thousands of years ago, the present subspecies keep tothemselves, working together only under extreme circumstances, such asa powerful mutual threat. Good dragons never work with evil dragons,however, though a few neutral dragon specimens have been known toassociate with evil or good dragons. Gold dragons occasionally associatefreely with silver dragons and emerald dragons are sometimes foundwith sapphire dragons.When evil dragons of different species encounter each other, they usu¬ally fight to protect their territories. While good dragons of different sub¬species are more tolerant of each other, they are also very territorial.They usually try to work out differences in a peaceful manner. Gem drag¬ons often settle inter-species disputes with riddling contests.AH subspecies of dragons have 12 age categories, and gain more abili¬ties and greater power as they age. Dragons range in size from several feetupon hatching to more than 100 feet, after they have attained the statusof great wyrrrt. The exact size varies according to age and subspecies, Adragon s wingspan b about equal to its body length: 15-20% of a dragonsbody length is neck.Generally when multiple dragons are encountered they are a matedpair and young. Mated dragons are always young adults, adults, or ma¬ture adults; young dragons found with their parents are of the youngadult stage or younger. To determine the age of young dragons roll ld6:1“ egg; 2 = hatchling: 3 - very young; 4 = young; 5 = juvenile; 6 -young adult.During the early pan of a dragon s young adult stage it leaves its par¬ents, greed driving it on to start a lair of its own, Sometimes, althoughrarely, Juvenile dragons leave their parents to start their own lives. As apair of mated dragons age beyond the mature adult stage, they split up.independence and the lust for treasure driving them apart. Older dragonsof either sex sometimes raise young, but only on their own—the otherparent leaves when the eggs are laid.Dragons, especially older ones, are generally solitary due to necessityand preference They' distance themselves from civilization, which theyconsider to be a petty and foolish mortal invention.Dragons are fearsome predators, but scavenge when necessary and caneat almost anything it they are hungry enough, A dragon's metabolismoperates like a highly efficient furnace, making use oi 95 % of all the foodthe dragon eats. A dragon can also metabolize inorganic material, andsome dragons have developed a taste for such fare.Although dragons goals and ideals vary among subspecies, all dragonsare covetous. They like to hoard wealth, collecting mounds of coins andgathering as many gems, jewels, and magical items as possible. They findtreasure pleasing to look at. and they bask in the radiance of the magicalitems. For a dragon, there H never enough treasure- Those with largehoards are loath to leave them for long, venturing out of their lairs onlyto patrol the immediate areas or to get food. Dragons like to make beds ofthem treasure, shaping nooks and mounds to fit their bodies. By the timethey mature tu the great wyrm stage, hundreds of gems and coins areimbedded in their hidesDragon Defenses; A dragon's Armor Class improves as it gets older andthe creature becomes tougher. Old dragons or older dragons are immuneto normal missiles; their gem-encrusted hides deflect arrows and othersmall projectiles. Large missiles (from catapults, giants, etc.) and magicalmissiles affect them normally. Young adult and older dragons radiate apersonal aura that makes them partially resistant to harmful magic Adragon's resistance to magic increases as it ages,Dragon Hide; Dragon skin Is prized by armorers with the skill to turn itinto shields and armor, valuable because of its appearance and the pro¬tection it affords. Dragon armor grants its wearer an Armor Class of 4less than the Armor Gass of the dragon it was taken from, tor a mini¬mum Armor Class of 8. Fur example, armor trom a juvenile brass dragon(AC OJ grants Its wearer AC 4, Dragon armor h supple and non-bulky.weighing only 25 pounds.The scales of gem dragons take on properties of actual gems: they aref aceted and reflect light. They are slightly more brittle than those of otherdragons, so armor made frum them requires repair more oftenDragon armor affords no extra protection, such as resistance to fire orcold, although the armor can be enchanted to provide such protection. Adragon's resistance to certain elements is based on Its loLal makeup, notjust its skin. Plain dragon armor is expensive to make, costing l.QQQ-10,000 gp, based on the workmanship and protection the armor affordsDragon skin armor can be enchanted, just as other forms of armor can, toa maximum of +5.Dragon shields also offer no additional protection. They are made otstretched hide over a wooden frame. Such shields weigh 3 pounds (ifsmall) or 8 pounds (if largel and cost 20120 or 30-180 gold pieces.Dragon Senses: All dragons have excellent senses of sight, smell, andhearing. Their enhanced senses enable them to detect all invisible objectsand creatures (including creatures or items hidden in darkness or log?within a radius equal to 10 feet times their age category. All dragons pos¬sess a natural ckiraudience ability with respect to their lairs; the range is20 feet per age category. The dragon must concentrate on a specific sec¬tion within its lair or surrounding area to hear what is going on,Some dragons are able to communicate telepathies! I y with any intelli¬gent creature. The percentage chance for a dragon to speak is based on itsIntelligence and age category* Refer to individual descriptions for per¬centages.Dragon Lairs: All dragon lairs are tar from mortal civilization, and theyare difficult to find because the dragons lake careful measures to cloaktheir coming and going. There is usually little, if any, wildlife around thelairs because neighboring creatures fear the dragons, and most dragonseat the few creatures that are foolish enough to remain.When a young adult dragon leaves its parents in search oi its own lair,it spends a few years moving from place to place to find a cave or cavernwhich best suits its personality. In most cases, the dragons search for in¬creasingly larger caves which can easily accommodate them as theygrow. Usually by the lime a dragon has reached the mature adult stage, iihas selected a large lair it plans to keep for the remainder ol its life. Adragon at this stage has gathered a considerable amount of treasure and isloath to move it to a different location.The location and character of dragon lairs vary based on each sub¬species; consult individual dragons for specific information. However,one thing remains constant any dragon considers its lair and neighboringareas its domains. A creat ure which violates or threatens the lair is threat¬ening the dragon and will be dealt with harshly. Some good dragons maybe more lenient than other subspecies in this matter. All dragons keeptheir treasure hidden deep within their lairs, and some dragons createhazardous conditions within their lain tn keep unwary creatures fromreaching the treasure.Dragon Flight: Despite their large size, dragons are graceful and compe¬tent fhers; most are maneuverability class C. This is due partially to theirpowerful wings, and partially to the dragon s innate magic Dragons canclimb at half speed and dive at double speed,A dragon can change direction quickly by executing a wingover ma¬neuver. A dragon cannot gain altitude during the round it executes aivingover. but it may dive, The maneuver enables the dragon to make aturn of 120 to 240 degrees regardless of its speed or size.Diving dragons can strike with their claws, with a +2 bonus to attackrolls. Dragons diving on land-bound opponents can also strike with bothwings, but then must land immediately after attacking.When engaging other flying opponents, dragons can either daw orbite, but not both. An airborne dragon must glide to cast spells (but in¬nate abilities can be used at any time) A gliding dragon loses 1.000 feet otaltitude per round, and its forward speed is equal to one half its flightspeed on the round before it began gliding,Dragon Fean Dragons can inspire panic or fear. The mere sight of ayoung adult or older dragon causes creatures with Fewer than 1 Hit Diei as well as all non carnivorous, nonaggressive creatures with fewer HitDice than the dragon) to automatically flee in panit for 4dG rounds.Trained war mounts, organized military units, and single creatureswith 1 Hit Die or mare, but with fewer Hit Dice than the dragon are notpanicked, but they may be stricken with fear if they are within the drag¬ons fear aura, The aura surrounds attacking or charging dragons In thespecified radius and in a path along the ground directly beneath a flyingdragon whose altitude is 250 feet or less. Creatures not automaticallypanicked are entitled io saving throws vs petrification. Creatures failingtheir saving throws are stricken with fear and fight with a -2 penalty totheir attack and damage rolls. The aura increases in size and power basedon the age category of the dragon: creatures subjected to the aura receivea saving throw bonus or a penalty as specif ied on the Dragon Table. Allcreatures with Hit Dice equal to or greater than those of the dragon areimmune to the fear effect.Gem dragons are not as inherently fearsome as other dragons, so sav¬ing throws against their fear auras recei ve bonuses; the bonuses appear inparenthesis in the Dragon Table,Dragon Hit Die Modifier: Dragon Hit Dice vary between subspecies andare modified based on age category. Refer to individual dragon entries forthe base Hit Dice for each species, and to the Dragon Table for the modi¬fier based on age. The older a dragon gets, the more Hit Dice it has. Forexample, a black dragon has a base of 10 Hit Dice. A hatchling blackdragon subtracts & dice, giving it a total of 4. A great wyrm black dragonadds 3 dice for a total of IS.Dragons' saving throws are tied to their Hit Dice. Each dragon saves asa fighter equal in level to the dragon’s Hit Dice, For example, a hatchlingblack dragon saves as a 4th-level fighter, while a great wyrm black drag¬on saver as an l&th-level fighter.Dragon Combat Modifier A dragons combat modifier varies with agecategory. The bonus or penalty applies to damage rolls for each physicalattack. It does not apply to a dragon's breath weapon. The combat modi¬fier is also applied to the dragon s base spelleasting level (age category),to determine the actual level at which the dragon casts spells (thus, a greatwyrm casts spells at 24th level of ability).Dragon Attacks: All dragons have a daw 'daw/bite attack form and abreath weapon. The latter can be used once every three rounds. Dragonsalso employ several other attack forms which are detailed in the follow¬ing text. Dragons frequently divide their attacks between opponents us¬ing the more dangerous attacks, such as the bite, against the foes theyperceive to be the toughest.A dragons preferred attacks are usually, in order, breath weapon,magical abilities f.orspellsn and physical attacks. A dragon that breathesduring a round of combat cannot also attack physically. Magical abilitiesI but not spells } can be used in addition to any attacks, except the breathweapon.CU ws: A dragon can use its claws to attack creatures lo its front andsides, If the dragon kicks with one rear leg, it can attack with only onedaw (the other must be used to maintain balance).Bile: Because of a dragon's long neck, it can bite creatures to its backand sides.Snatch: Only young adult and older dragons can snatch. This occurswhen a flying dragon dives and attempts to grab a creature in one of itsdaws. A creature struck by this method is taken into the air. There is a50% chance that a snatched creature has its arms pinned, and thereforecannot physically attack the dragon, Snatched creatures are sometimestaken to great heights and dropped. The snatched creature can besqueezed in the daw for automatic claw damage each round, or transfer¬red to the dragons mouth (the transfer requires a successful attack roll),If the transfer succeeds, the victim automatically suffers bite damage eachround: if it tails, the victim is dropped. Dragons of age old and older cancarry a victim in each daw, and they can try to snatch two victims atonce. Wyrtm and great wyrms can carry three victims, but one of thefirst two snatched must be transferred from daw to mouth before thethird can be snatched.A dragon can snatch creatures two or more size categories smaller thanitself. For example, a dragon that is 45' long is a Gargantuan creature, sothe biggest creature it can snatch is a Large one (12' long),Plummet: If the DM chooses to allow plummets, an airborne dragon,or a dragon jumping and descending from at least 30 feet above a tar¬get , can land on a victim. The dragon crushes and pins opponents usingIts claws and tail, inflicting damage equal to its bite. The dragon cancrush as many creatures as its combat modifier. The dragon rolls a sep¬arate attack against each creature affected. Creatures that are missedare assumed to have escaped, Creatures that are crushed must mil suc¬cessful saving throws vs. petrification or be pinned under the dragon,automatically suffering crushing damage during the next round unlessthe dragon moves off them. If the dragon chooses to maintain the pin,the victims must roll successful saving throws vs, petrification to getfree. The dragons combat modifier applies as a penalty to all savingthrow vs. the crash, A dragon cannot take any other actions whenplummeting or pinning.Kick: Any dragon can kick creatures attacking it from behind, A kickdelivers daw damage, and creatures struck must roll their Dexterity orless on ld2G or be kicked back ld6 feet, +1 foot per age category of thedragon. Those knocked back must make successful saving throws vs. pet¬rification (adjusted by the dragon’s combat modifier) or fall. If the dragonattacks with one daw, it can kick with only one hind leg (the other mustbe used for balance). It cannot slap its tail while kicking.Wing Buffet: Young adult and older dragons can employ their wings incombat; targets must be at the dragon's sides. The damage inflicted is thesame as a daw attack, and creatures struck must mil their Dexterity orJess on ld20 or be knocked prone.Tail Sldp: Adult and older dragons can use their tails to attack creaturesto their rear and sides. A tail attack inflicts the same damage as two dawattacks and affects as many targets as the dragons age category. Thedragon rolls a separate attack against each creature. Creatures struckmust roll successful saving throws vs, petrification \adjusted by the drag¬on’s combat modifier) or be stunned for ld4 + 1 minutes. A tail slap cansmash a light wooden structure and even damage a cube of force (onecharge per two points of combat modifier, round down).Staih Any dragon flying near the ground can halt its forward motionand hover for one round; it must land immediately thereafter. Oncestopped, the dragon can attack with its bite and all four legs. It can use itsbreath weapon instead, but this rarely happens since dragons can breatheon the wing. If a dragon stalls in an area with lots of trees or loose earth,the draft from its wings creates a dust cloud with the same radius as itsfear aura. Creatures within the cloud are blinded, and no spell casting ispossible. The dust lasts far one roundSpells: Dragons learn spells haphazardly over the years The DMshould randomly determine which spells any particular dragon knows.The dragon can cast each spell once per day. unless random determina¬tion indicates the same spell mare than once, in which case the dragoncan cast it more than once a day. Dragons to not use spell books or prayto deities; they simply sleep, concentrate when they awaken, and remem¬ber their spells. Dragon spells have only a verbal component; the spellshave a casting time of 1, regardless of level. Dragons cannot physicallyattack, use their breath weapon, use their magical abilities, or fly (exceptto glide) while casting a spell.
Black dragons are abusive, quick to anger, and resent intrusions of anykind. They like dismal surroundings, heavy vegetation, and prefer dark¬ness to daylight. Although not as intelligent as other dragons, black drag¬ons are instinctively cunning and malevolent.At birth, a black dragons scales are thin, small, and glossy. But as ihe drag¬on ages, its scales become larger thicker and duller, which helps it camou¬flage itself m swamps and marshes. Black dragons speak their own tongue, atongue common to all evil dragons, and 10% of hatchling black dragons havean ability to communicate with any intelligent creature. The chance to pos¬sess this ability increases 5% per age category of the dragon.Combat: Slack dragons prefer to ambush their targets, using their sur¬roundings as cover. Their favorite targets are men, who they will some¬times stalk for several minutes in an attempt to gauge their strength andwealth before attacking. Against a band of men or a formidable creature*older black dragons will use their special abilities first, so the very' forcesof the marsh can weaken the targets before the dragon joins the (Fight.Black dragons will also use their breath weapon bef ore dosing m melee.When fighting in heavily vegetated swamps and marshes, black dragonsattempt to stay in the water or along the ground; the numerous trees andleafy canopies limit their flying maneuverability. When faced with an op¬ponent which poses too much of a threat, a black dragon will attempt tofly out ol sight, so it will not leave tracks, and hide in a deep pond or bog.Breath weapon special abilities: A black dragon s breath weapon is awide stream of acid that extends 60 1 in a straight line from the dragon'shead. AH creatures caught in this stream must save vs. breath weapon forhalf damage. A black dragon casts spells and uses its magical abilities atSth levd, plus its combat modifier.Black dragons are bom with an innate mafer brat/ifttg ability and animmunity to acid As they age. they gain the following additionalpowers:Juvenile: darkness three times a day in a JO* radius per age category of thedragon. Aduft: corrupt water once a day. For every age category a dragonattains, it can stagnate 10 cubic feet of water, making it become still, foul,Inert, and unable to support animal file. When this ability is used againstpotions and elixirs, they become useless if they roll a 15 or better on ld20.Old: plant grotu/h once a day. Venerable: summon inserts once a day.Great wyrm: ehffmi reptiles three times a day. This operates as a charmmammals spell, but is applicable only to reptiles,Ha hitat/Society: Black dragons are found in swamps, marshes, rain for¬ests, and jungles. They revel in a steamy environment where canopies oftrees filter out most of the sunlight, swarms of insects fill the air. andstagnant moss-covered ponds lie in abundance. Black dragons are excel¬lent swimmers and enjoy lurking in the gloomy depths of swamps andbogs. They also are graceful in flight; however, they prefer to fly at nightwhen their great forms are hidden by the darkness of the sky. Black drag¬ons are extremely selfish, and the majority of those encountered will bealone. When a family of black dragons is encountered, the adults willprotect their young. However, if it appears the adults' lives are in jeop¬ardy they will abandon their young to save themselves.They lair in large, damp caves and mullindwribered subterranean caverns.Older dragons are able to hide the entrance to their lairs wilh their plantgrowth ability, Black dragons are especially fond of coins. Older black drag¬ons sometimes capture and question humans, before killing them, to find outwhere stockpiles of gold, silver, and platinum coins are kept.Ecology: Black dragons can eat almost anything, although they preferto dine primarily or fish, mollusks, and other aquatic creatures. They areland of eels, especially the giant varieties. They also hunt tor red meat,but they like to iF pickle r it by letting it lie in pond? within their lair fordays before eating it.
Arid desertsVery ra reSolitary or danAnySpecialVery (11-12)Speciallawful evil3+special1-6/1-8/3-24SpecialVariableVariableG (42' base)Fanatic (17-16)VariableBlue dragons are extremely territorial and voracious. They love to spendlonjg hours preparing ambushes for herd animals and unwary travelers,and they spend equally long hours dwelling on their success and admiringtheir trophies.The size of a blue dragon s scales increases little as the dragon ages,although they do become thicker and harder. The scales vary in colorfrom an iridescent azure to a deep indigo, retaining a glossy finishthrough all of the dragons stages because the blowing desert sands polishthem. This makes blue dragons easy to spot in barren desert surround¬ings, However, the dragons often conceal themselves, burrowing into thesand so only part of their heads are exposed.Blue dragons love to soar in the hot desert air; usually flying in the daytimewhen temperatures are the highest Some blue dragons nearly match the colorof the desert sky and use this coloration to their advantage in combat.Blue dragons speak their own tongue, a tongue common to all evildragons, and 12% of hatchling blue dragons have an ability to communi¬cate with any intelligent creature. The chance to possess this ability in¬creases 5% per age category of the dragonCombat: Blue dragons prefer to fight from a distance so their opponentscan dearly witness the full force of their breath weapon and so little or nothreat is posed to themselves. Often blue dragons will attack from di¬rectly above or will burrow beneath the sands until opponents comewithin 100 feet Oldm blue dragons will use their special abilities, such asJtafJudttflftwy terrain, in concert with these tactics to mask the land andaid in their chances to surprise. Blue dragons will only run from a fight ifthey are severely damaged, since they view retreat as cowardly.Breath weapon special abilities; A blue dragons breath weapon is a 5 Jwide bolt of lightning that streaks 100 r in a straight line from the dragon'smouth. AH creatures caught in this stream must save vs. breath weaponfor half damage. Blue dragons cast spelts and use their magical abilities at7th level adjusted by their combat modifier.Blue dragons are born with an immunity to electricity. As they age,they gain the following additional powers; Young: create or destroy wa¬ter three times per day. Juvenile: sound imitation at will Adult: dust devilonce a day Old: ventriloquism once a day. Venerable: control winds oncea day. Great wyrm: hallucinatory terrain once a day.Habitat Society: Blue dragons are found in deserts; arid, windsweptplains, and hot, humid badlands. They enjoy the bleak terrain becausethere are few obstacles—only an occasional rock outcropping or dune—to interrupt the view of their territories. They spend hours looking outover their domains, watching for trespassers and admiring their property.Most of the blue dragons encountered will be alone because they do notwant to share their territories with others. However, when a family isencountered the male dragon will attack ferociously, protecting hisproperty—his mate and young. The female dragon also will join in theattack if the threat proves significant.Blue dragons' enemies are men, who kill the dragons for their skin andtreasure, and brass dragons, which share the same environment, if a bluedragon discovers a brass dragon in the same region, it will not rest untilthe trespassing dragon is killed or driven away.Blue dragons lair in vast underground caverns in which they store theirtreasure. Although blue dragons will collect anything which looks valu¬able, they are fond of gems—especially sapphires.Ecology: Blue dragons are able to consume nearly anything, and some¬times are forced to cat snakes, lizards, and desert plants to help sate theirgreat hunger. However, they arc particularly fond of herd animals, suchas camels, and they will gorge themselves on caravans of the creatureswhich they cook with a lightning holt.
3 + special1-6/1-8/2-20 (2dl0)SpecialVariableVariableG {36' base)Green dragons are bad tempered, mean, cruel, and nude. They hate good¬ness and good-aligned creatures. They love intrigue and seek to enslaveother woodland creatures, killing those who cannot be controlled or in¬timidated.A hatchling green dragon s scales are thin, very small, and a deep shadeof green that appears nearly black. As the dragon ages, the scales growlarger and become lighter, turning shades of forest, emerald and olivegreen, which helps It blend in with its wooded surroundings. A greendragon's scales never become as thick as other dragons', remainingsmooth and flexible.Green dragons speak their own tongue, a tongue common lo all evildragons, and 12% of hatchling green dragons have an ability to commu¬nicate with any intelligent creature. The chance to possess this ability increases 5% per age category of the dragon.Combah Green dragons initiate fights with little or no provocation, pickingon creatures of any stee. If the target creature intrigues the dragon or appearsto be difficult to deal with, the dragon will stalk the creature, using its envi¬ronment for cover, until it determines the best time to strike and the mostappropriate tactics to use. If the target appears formidable, the dragon willfirst attack with its breath weapon, magical abilities, and spells. However, ifthe target appears weak, the dragon will make its presence known quickly torit enjoys evoking terror in its targets. When the dragon has tired of this game,it will bring down the creature using its physical attacks so the fight lastslonger and the creatures agony is prolonged,Sometimes, the dragon elects to control a creature, such as a human ordemi-human through intimidation and suggestion. Green dragons like toquestion men, especially adventurers, to leam more about their society, abili¬ties. what is going on in the countryside, and if there is treasure nearbyBreath weapon special abilities: A green dragon's breath weapon is a cloudpoisonous chlorine gas that is 50 J long, 40 r wide, and 30 feet high, Crea¬tures within the cloud may save versus breath weapon for half damage. Agreen dragon casts its spells at 6th level, adjusted by its combat modifier.From birth, green dragons are immune to gasses. As they age, theygain the following additional powers: Juvenile: water breathing. Adult:suggestion once a day. Mature adult: witrjt wood three times a day Old:plant growth once a day. Very old: entangle once a day Wynn: pass with¬out trace three times a day,Habital/Sodety: Green dragons are found in suh-tropiea] and temperateforests the older the forest and bigger the trees, the better. The sights andsmells of the woods are pleasing to the dragon, and it considers the entireforest or woods Its territory, Sometimes the dragon will enter into a rela¬tionship with other evil forest-dwelling creatures, which keep the dragoninformed about what is going on in the forest and surrounding area in ex¬change for their lives. If a green dragon lives in a forest on a hillside, it willseek to enslave hill giants, which the dragon considers its greatest enemy. Agreen dragon makes it$ lair im underground chambers far beneath its forestThe majority of green dragons encountered will be alone. However,when a mated pair df dragons and their young are encountered, the fe¬male will leap to the attack. The male will take the young lo a place ofsafety before joining ihe fight. The parents are extremely protective oftheir young, despite their evil nature, and will sacrifice their own lives tosave their offspring.Ecology: Although green dragons have been known to eat practicallyanything, including shrubs and small trees when they are hungry enough,they especially prize elves. If the forest i$ on a hillside, hill giants will huntthe younger dragons, which they consider a delicacy.
Rod dragons are the most covetous and greedy of all dragons, foreverseeking to increase their treasure hoards. They are obsessed with theirwealth and memorize an inventory accurate to the last copper. They areexceptionally vain and self confident, considering Lhemselves superiornot only to other dragons, but to all other life in genera].When red dragons hatch, their small scales are a bright glossy scarlet. Be¬cause of this, they can be quickly spotted by predators and men hunting forskins, so they are hidden m deep underground lairs and not permitted to ven¬ture outside until toward the end of their young stage when their scales haveturned a deeper red, the glossy texture has been replaced by a smooth, dullfinish, and they are more able to take care of themselves. As the dragon con¬tinues to age. the scales become large, thick, and as strong as metal.Red dragons speak their own tongue, a tongue common to all evildragons, and 16% of hatchling red dragons have an ability to communi¬cate with any intelligent creature. The chance to possess this ability in¬creases 5% per age category of the dragon.Combat; Because red dragons are so confident, they never pause to ap¬praise an adversary. When they notice a target they make a snap decisionwhether to attack, using one of many perfect" strategies worked outahead of time in the solitude of their lairs. If the creature appears smalland insignificant, such as an unarmored man, the dragon will land toattack with its claws and bite, not wanting to obliterate the creature withits breath weapon, as any treasure might be consumed by the flames.However, if a red dragon encounters a group of armored men. it will useits breath weapon special abilities, and spells £if it is old enough to havethem) before landing.Brea t h wea p on/spc data bill t f es: A red dragon's breath weapon is a sear-ingconeof fire 90' long 5' wide at the dragon's mouth and 30' at the base.Creatures struck by the flames must save versus breath weapon for halfdamage, Red dragons cast spells at 9th level, adjusted by their combatmodifiers.Red dragons are bom immune to fire. As they age. they gain the followingadditional powers Young: affect normal fires three times per day. Juvenile:pyrotedinics three times per day. Adult: heat metal once per day Old: sugges¬tion once per day. Very old: hypnotism once per day. Venerable: detect gems,kind and number in a 100' radius three times a day.Habitat Society: Red dragons can be found on great hills or on soaringmountains. From a high perch they haughtily survey their territory,which they consider to be everything that can be seen from their position.They prefer to lair in large caves that extend deep into the earth.A red dragon enjoys Its own company, not associating with other crea¬tures, or even other red dragons, unless the dragon's aims can be fur¬thered, For example, some red dragons who have charm spells will ordermen to act as the dragon's eyes and ears, gathering information aboutnearby settlements and sources of treasure. When a red dragonss off¬spring reach the young adult stage, they are ordered from the lair arid thesurrounding territory, as they are viewed as competition.Red dragons are quick to fight all creatures which encroach on theirterritory, especially copper and silver dragons which sometimes share thesame environment. They hate gold dragons above all else because theybelieve gold dragons are "'nearly* as powerful as themselves.Ecology: Red dragons are meat eaters, although they are capable of di¬gesting almost anything. Their favorite food is a maiden of any human ordemi-human race. Sometimes the dragons arc able to charm key villagersinto regularly sacrificing maidens to them.
3 +special1-6/1-6/2-16 (2 d&)SpecialVariableVariableH (24 r base)White dragons, the smallest and weakest of the evil dragons, are slowwit ted but efficient hunters. They are impulsive, vicious, and animalistic,tending to consider only the needs and emotions of the moment and hav¬ing no foresight or regret. Despite their low intelligence, they are asgreedy and evil as the other evil dragons.The scales of a hatchling white dragon are a mirror-Hke glisteningwhite, which makes them virtually invisible against a snowy back¬ground, As the dragon ages, the sheen disappears, and by the time itreaches the very old stage, scales of pale blue and light gray are mixed inwith the white.White dragons speak their own tongue, a tongue common to all evildragons, and 7% of hatchling white dragons have an ability to communi¬cate with any intelligent creature. The chance to possess this ability in¬creases 5% per age category of the dragon.Combat: Regardless of a target's size, a white dragon's favorite methodof attack is to use its breath weapon and special abilities before closing tomelee. This tactic sometimes works to the dragons detriment, as it canexhaust its breath weapon on smaller prey and then be faced with a largercreature it must attack physically. If a white dragon is pursuing creaturesin the water such as polar bears or seals, it will melee them in their el^-ment, fighting with its daws and bite,Breath weapon special abilities: A white dragon's breath weapon is acone of frost 70* long 5’ wide at the dragon's mouth, and 25' wide at thebase. Creatures caught in the blast may Save versus Breath Weapon forhalf damage. A white dragon casts its spells and uses its magical abilitiesat 5th level, plus its combat modifier.From their birth, white dragons are immune to cold. As they grow old¬er, they gain the following additional abilities: Juvenile: ice walking,which allows the dragon to walk across ice as easily as creatures walkacross flat, dry ground. Mature adult: gust of wind three times a day.Very old: wall of fog three times a day, this produces snow or hail ratherthan rain. Wynn: freezing fog three times a day. This obscures vision in a100' radius and causes frost to form, creating a thin layer of glare ice onthe ground and on all surfaces within the radius.Ha bit at. Society: White dragons live in chilly or cold regions, preferringlands where the temperature rarely rises above freezing and ice and snowalways cover the ground. When temperatures become too warm, thedragons become lethargic. White dragons bask in the frigid winds thatwhip over the landscape, and they wallow and play in deep snow banks.White dragons are lackadaisical parents. Although the young remainwith the parents from hatchling to juvenile or young adult stage, they arenot protected. Once a dragon passes from its hatchling stage, it must fendtor itself, learning how to hunt and defend itself by watching the parents.White dragons' Lairs are usually icey caves and deep subterraneanchambers: they select caves that open away from the warming rays of thesun. White dragons store all of their treasure within their lair, and preferkeeping it in caverns coated in ice, which reflect the gems and coins andmake the treasure appear even larger. They are fond of gems, especiallydiamonds, because they are pretty to look at.Ecology; Although white dragons, as all other dragons, are able to eatnearly anything, they are very particular and will consume only foodwhich has been frozen. Usually after a dragon has killed a creature withits breath weapon it will fall to devouring it while the carcass Is still stiffand frigid. It will bury other kills in snow banks until they are suitablyfrozen.White dragons' natural enemies are frost giants who kill the dragonsfor food and armor and subdue them to use for guards and mounts.
Amethyst dragons are wise and regal, with a detached air, ignoring whatthey consider to be petty squabbles between good and evil, law and cha¬os. When hatched, amethyst dragons have lavender skin with smallscales of a light, translucent purple. As they grow older, the scales gradu¬ally darken. Adults are a sparkling lavender in color.Amethyst dragons speak their own tongue and the tongue common toall gem dragons, and 18% of hatchling amethyst dragons have an abilityto communicate with any intelligent creature. The chance to possess thisability increases 5% per age category of the dragon.day, Old: Offtakes resilient sphere three limes a day, Very old: reflectingpool once a day. Venerable: coni rol weather once a day.Combat: Amethyst dragons prefer talking over combat, if parleying goesbadly, the dragon attacks first with its breath weapon, then with psionicsand spells. They never hide or attempt ambush. Amethyst dragons con¬sider retreat dishonorable, buL do so it faced with death.Breath weapon,special abilities: An amethyst dragons breath weapon is afaceted, violet lozenge, which it can spit into the midst of enemies, up to75 feet away. The lozenge explodes with concuss!ve force, causing theindicated damage to all creatures within 60 feet of the impact (save vs.breath weapon for half damage). In addition, all creatures size huge andsmaller must save vs. paralyzation or be knocked down. Any creaturetaking damage from the blast has a 50% chance of being knocked uncon¬scious for one round per age level of the dragon, plus IdS rounds. Anamethyst dragon casts spells and uses its magical abilities at 9th level,plus its combat modifier.Amethyst dragons are bom with art innate water breath tag ability andan immunity to poisons. They are also immune to force attacks and ef¬fects, such as those from beads of force, Bighy's hand spells, wall of forceand Offtakes resilient sphere, As they age, they gain the following addi¬tional powers: Young: water walking six times a day Juvenile: neutralizepohon six limes a day, Adult: shapechange, as a druid, into a reptile,bird, or mammal, three times a day, with each form usable only once perCommon powers (most amethyst dragons prefer psychokinetic powersand many choose psychometabolism as an additional discipline):% Psychokinesis - Sciences: detonate, prefect force, telekinesis Devo¬tions; control body inertial barrier, molecular agitation.* PsychotneUbolisnt - Sciences; complete healing, energy containment,metamorphosis, Devotions: cell adjustment, expansion, reduction,% Telepathy - Sciences; domination, mindiink, mind wipe. Devotionscontact, ESP identity penetration, truthear.% Mel a psionks - Sciences: empower, psychic surgery, ultrablast. Devo¬tions; magnify, psionic sense, psychic drain.Habitat Society: Amethyst dragons live on the shores of isolated moun¬tain lakes and pools, some in caves beneath the water. They are goodparents, but believe their young should fend tor themselves as soon asthey become young adults. Amethyst dragons dislike red and white drag¬ons, and consider silver and copper dragons to be foolish.Ecology; Amethyst dragons prefer to eat fish and a large number of gems.They are not inherently enemies with any life form.
3 + special1 - 6 / 1 - 6 / 2-12VariableVariableVariableL (12 1 base)Fanatic (17-1 g)Varia bleCrystal dragons are the friendliest of the gem dragons, always curiousabout the world. Though they seldom seek out company, they willinglyconverse with visitors who do not try to steal from them.At birth, crystal dragons have glossy white scales As the dragons age.their scales become translucent. Moonlight and starlight cause theirscales to luminesce, while bright sunlight lends them a dazzling brilliancewhich makes crystal dragons almost unbearable to look atCrystal dragons speak their own tongue and the tongue common to allgem dragons, and 10% of hatchling crystal dragons have an ability tocommunicate with any intelligent creature. The chance to possess thisability increases 5% per age category of the dragon.Combat: Crystal dragons greatly prefer conversation to combat, and of¬ten use charm person early in any conversation. They do not initiallyhide, but if visitors become hostile, a crystal dragon will retreat immedi¬ately to observe its enemies with Its special abilities, and plan an attack.Often, it uses its breath weapon first, to weaken and disorient enemies.Spells and other abilities are used as needed, with daws and bite a lastresort.Breath weapon special abilities: This dragon s breath weapon is a cone ofglowing shards; the cone is 60 teet long, 5 feet wide at the dragonsmouth, and 25 feet wide at the base. Creatures caught in the blast cansave vs, breath weapon for half damage, and must make a second savingthrow vs breath weapon or be blinded by the dazzling shards for oneturn per age level of the dragon. The shards shine as bright as daylight,and can be seen tor miles. Creatures within 60 leet must save vs breathweapon or be dazzled, incurring a penalty of - 2 to attack rolls for oneturn per age level of the dragon. A crystal dragon casts spells and usesmagical abilities at 5th level, plus its combat modifier.Crystal dragons are born immune to light-based attacks and normalcold, and able to casL charm person at will. As they age, they gain theseadditional powers: Juvenile: color spray three times a day. Mature adult:suggestion three times a day. Very old: fudtacufe once a day. This allowsthe dragon to enchanL one of its scales as a stone of good luck. The en¬chantment lasts one hour per age category of the dragon. Such scales aregiven to friendly visitors, Wyrm: cortf red winds three Limes a day,* Clairsentience - Sciences: clairaudiente. clairvoyance, precognition.Devotions: any.Habitaf Sodety: Crystal dragons prefer cold, open areas with clear skies,and they enjoy stargazing. They have been known to build snow forts*create beautiful snow sculptures, and throw balls of snow at various tar¬gets, They are fun-loving and mischievous. Crystal dragons are reasona¬bly good parents, if somewhat irresponsible.Crystal dragons are hunted by some white dragons. However, a rarecrystal dragon will adopt a young white dragon, to teach it to be friendly.Though generally friendly they bear great enmity towards all giants,who sometimes try to enslave them.Ecology: Crystal dragons prefer gems and metal ores to all other foods.
Emerald dragons are very curious, particularly about local history andcustoms, but prefer to only observe. They are the most paranoid of thegem dragons, and do not tike people get too close to their treasure.Emerald dragons have translucent green scales at birth, As they age,the seal® harden and take on many shades of green. They scintillate inthe light, and the dragons hide seems to be in constant motion.Emerald dragons speak their own tongue and the tongue common to allgem dragons, and 14% of hatchling emerald dragons have an ability tocommunicate with any intelligent creature. The chance to possess thisability increases 5% per age category of the dragon.Combat: Emerald dragons usually set up traps and alarms around theirlairs to warn them of visitors. They often hide from intruders, using spe¬cial abilities to observe, and seldom come out to speak, If intruders attackor approach the dragons treasure, the dragon burrows underneath tosurprise its victims, then use breath weapon and daws, seeking to quicklydisable as many as it can. If faced with superior forces, the dragon re¬treats, and will wait years for revenge if necessary.Breath weapon special abilities: An emerald dragons breath weapon is aloud, keening wail which sets up a sonic vibration affecting all creatureswithin 120 feet of the dragons mouth. Those in the area can save vs.breath weapons for half damage from the painful vibrations. Victimsmust make a second saving throw vs, breath weapon or be stunned, un¬able to defend nr attack, for three rounds per age level of the dragon, plusld4 rounds. Those who successfully save are deafened and disorientedinstead, for a like amount of time, and at - 1 to attack rolls. Deafnessdoes not protect one from vibratory damage, but pre-vents stunning oradditional deafness. An emerald dragon casts spells and uses its magicalabilities at 6 th level, plus its combat modifier,Emerald dragons are bom with an innate flame walk ability and animmunity to sound-based attacks As they age, they gain the followingadditional powers: Young: audible gtamer three times a day. Juvenile:hypnotism three times a day. Adult: Melf s minute meteors three limes aday. Mature adult: hold person three limes a day. Venerable: (miniaterock once a day. Great wyrni: geos once a day. Hypnotism and geas areeffected by the dragon's skilled rippling movement of its scales.Common powers (most emerald dragons prefer telepathic powers):* Qairsenfience ‘Sciences: aura sight, object reading, precognition. De¬votions: all-around vision, combat mind, danger sense,• Telepathy - Sciences; ejection, mindlink, probe. Devotions: contact.ESP, life detection, sight link, sound link.Habitat/Society: Emerald dragons are reclusive, making lairs in the conesof extinct or seldom active volcanoes. These dragons are protective par¬ents and prefer their young to stay in the lair as long as possible for mutu¬al protection. Emerald dragons sometimes live near sapphire dragons,and they fear the voracious greed of red dragons.Ecology: Emerald dragons will eat anything, but prefer lizards and gi¬ants, They are actively hostile towards fire giants.
While not actively hostile, sapphire dragons are miiitantly territorial andinitially distrustful of anyone who approaches.These beautiful dragons range from light to dark blue, and sparkle inthe light, even at birth. Sapphire dragons are often mistaken for bluedragons, unless someone recalls the latter's preferred arid environment.Sapphire dragons speak their own tongue and the tongue common toall gem dragons, and 16% of hatchling sapphire dragons have an abilityto communicate with any intelligent creature. The chance to possess thisability increases 5% per age category of the dragon.Combat: Sapphire dragons generally observe intruders before decidingwhat to do with them, unless known enemies such as draw or dwarvesare present. If others are not actively hostile the dragon attempts conver¬sation and spell use to determine their intentions and convince them toleave. If the dragon or its treasure is threatened, it attacks immediatelywith breath weapon spells, and physical attacks. It uses psionics or otherspecial abilities to escape if its life is in jeopardy.Breath weapon special abilities: This dragon s breath weapon is a cone ofhigh-pitched, almost inaudible sound. 75 feet long, 5 feet wide at thedragon s mouth, and 25 feet wide at the base. Creatures caught by theblast can save vs. breath weapon for half damage from the sound's dis¬ruption, and must make a second saving throw vs, breath weapon or beaffected by tear, fleeing the dragon in panic for two rounds per age levelof the dragon, plus ld6 rounds. This is a metabolic effect, and creaturesunaffected by magical fear still suffer from the effects if they fail theirsave. Deafness does not protect one from the breath weapon s damage,though it prevents fear effects, A sapphire dragon casts spells and usesmagical abilities at 7th level, plus combat modifier.Sapphire dragons are bom with immunity to all forms of fear, as wellas immunity to web, hold , slow, and parqlysis. As they age, they gain thefollowing additional powers: Young: con firms J tight three times a day.Juvenile; sfone shape three times a day. Adult; anti-ma^c shell once aday. Mature adult: passmaH six limes a day. Venerable: wall of stonethree limes a day. Great wyrm: Sim ray three times a day +Common powers (most sapphire dragons use psychoportivc powers):* CJairsentience - Sciences; dalraudience, clairvoyance. Devotions:know direction, radial navigation.* Psychokinesis - Sciences; disintegrate, molecular rearrangement, tele¬kinesis. Devotions; animate shadow, control light, molecular manipula¬tion. soften.Habitat, Society; Sapphire dragons live deep underground and often placetheir treasure in caverns accessible only through magic or psionics. Theysometimes share territory with emerald dragons. Sapphire dragons treattheir young well, but force them to leave and find their own territory assoon as they are young adults.Ecology: Sapphire dragons consider giant spiders a great delicacy and of¬ten hunt them, Deep dragons, drew, dwarves, mind Flayers, and abolethare great enemies of sapphire dragons
Topaz dragons are unfriendly and selfish. Though not malevolent, butthey are seldom pleasant to deal with because of their erratic behaviorTopaz dragons neither seek company nor welcome it.At hatching, topaz dragons are a dull yellow-orange in color. As theyage and Lheir scales harden, the scales become translucent and faceted,Adult topaz dragons sparkle in full sunlight.Topaz dragons speak their own tongue and the tongue common to allgem dragons, and 12% of hatchling topaz dragons have an ability tocommunicate with any intelligent creature. The chance to possess thisability increases 5 % per age category of the dragon.Combat: Topaz dragons dislike intruders, but avoid combat, often con¬versing to hide psiomc* or magic use. U intruders are hostile, or the drag¬on tires of them, it attacks, psionically first, ii possible, using spells asneeded. They enjoy using teeth and claws, and usually save their breathweapon until wounded. The dragon may pretend to surrender to buytime, and retreats ii greatly threatened. It usually makes one or morefalse retreats, attempting to come back and attack with surprise.Breath weapon ’special abilities: This dragon s breath weapon is a cone ofdehydration 70 feet long, 5 feet wide at the dragon s mouth and 25 feetwide at the base. When directed against liquids, one cubic foot of waterdries up per hit point of damage. Creatures caught by the cone can makea saving throw vs. breath weapon for half damage from water loss.Those who Fail to save lose ld6*6 Strength points; those who succeedlose only ld6 Strength points. Curative spells less powerful than heal orregeneration are ineffective against Strength loss, although victims whoare carefully nursed back to health recover 1 Strength point per day. Anycreature reduced to a Strength of 0 or less dies instantly. A topaz dragoncasts spells and uses magical abilities at 5th level, plus combat modifier.At birth, topaz dragons can breathe water and are immune to cold. Asthey age, they gain the following powers; Young: protection from euif orgooti three times a day Juvenile: Mbtk three times a day. Adult: wallof fog three times a da y. Mature adult: airy water three times a day, 10-foot radius per age category of Lhe dragon, Old: part mater once a day,Common powers (most topaz dragons prefer psycho metabolic powers)• Psychokinesis - Sciences: telekinesis. Devotions: animate object, con¬trol wind, molecular manipulation, soften.I Psycho metabolism - Sciences: energy containment, life drainingmetamorphosis. Devotions: biofeedback, body equilibrium, cause decay,chemical simulation.Habitat Society: Topaz dragons live by the sea, often building or claimingcave* below the waterline: they keep their caves completely dry. Thesedragons enjoy sunning on rocky outcroppings, enjoying the wind andspray. They like water little and swim only to hunt or attack. They areindifferent parents at best, and abandon young to protect themselvesThey dislike bronze dragons and attack them on sight.Ecology: Topaz dragons prefer to cat fish and other aquatic creatures,especially giant squid.
3 + special1-6/1-6/4-16SpecialVariableVariableC (30 J base}Fanatic {17 base)VariableBras? dragons* aru great talkers, but not particularly good conversational¬ists. They are egotistical and often boorish , They often have useful infor¬mation, but will divulge it only after drifting off the subject many timesand after hints that a gift would be appreciated.At birth, a brass dragon's scales are dull. Their color is a brassy, mot¬tled brown. As the dragon gets older, the scales become more brassy, un¬til they reach a warm, burnished appearance.Combat: Brass dragons would rather talk than fight. If an intelligentcreature tries to take its leave of a brass dragon without talking to it atlength, she dragon might have a fit of pique and try to force a conversa¬tion with suggestion or by giving the victim a dose of sleep gas. If thevictim falls asleep it will awaken to find itself pinned under the dragon orbuned to the neck in the sand until the dragon's thirst for small talk isslaked. Before melee, brass dragons create a cloud of dust with dust deni!or control winds, then charge or snatch. Brass dragons often use controltemperature to create heat to discomfort their opponents. When facedwith real danger, younger brass dragons will fly out of sight, then hide byburrowing. Older dragons spurn this ploy.Breath weapon special abilities; A brass dragon has two breath weap¬ons: a cone of sleep gas 70‘ long, 5' wide at the dragons mouiin and 20'wide at its end: or a cloud of blistering desert heat 50' long, 40' wide, and20 r high. Creatures caught in the gas, regardless of Hit Dice or level, mustsave vs. breath weapon or fall asleep for 10 minutes per age level of thedragon. Creatures caught in the heat take damage, save vs, breath weap¬on for half. A brass dragon casts its spells and uses Its magical abilities at6th level, plus its combat modifier.At birth, brass dragons can speak tcrfh animals freely, and are immuneto fire and heat As they age, they gain the following additional powers:Young: create or destroy water three times a day Juvenile: dust devil oncea day. Adult: suggestion once a day. Mature adult: control temperature 3times a day in a 10' radius per age level. Old: control winds once a day.Great wyrm: Summon dfinni once a week. The dragon usually asks thedjinni to preform some service. Although the djinni serves willingly thedragon will order it into combat only in extreme circumstances, as thedragon would be dismayed and embarrassed if the djinni were killed.Habitat Society Brass dragons are found in arid, warm dimates: rang¬ing from sandy deserts to dry steppes They love intense, dry heat andspend most of their time basking in the sun. They lair in high caves, pref¬erably facing east where the sun can warm the rocks, and their territoriesalways contain several spots where they can bask and trap unwary trav¬elers into conversation*Brass dragons are very social They usually are on good terms with neigh¬boring brass dragons and sphinxes. Brass dragons are dedicated parents. Iftheir young arc attacked they will try to slay the enemy, using their heatbreath weapons and taking full advantage of their own immunity.Because they share the same habitat, blue dragons are brass dragons'worst enemies. Brass dragons usually get the worst of a one-on-one con¬frontation, mostly because of the longer reach of the blue dragons breathweapon. Because of this, brass dragons usually try to evade blue dragonsuntil they can rally their neighbors for 3 mass attack.Ecology: Like other dragons, brass dragons can, and will, eat almostanything it the need arises. In practice, however, they eat very little. Theyare able to get nourishment from morning dew, a rare commodity in theirhabitat, and have been seen carefully lifting it off plants with their longtongues.
3 + special1-8/1-8/4-24SpecialVariableVariableG (42' base)Fanatic (17 base)VariableBronze dragons are inquisitive and fond of humans and denit-humans.They enjoy polymdrphing into small friendly animals so they can unob¬trusively observe humans and demi-humans, especially advenlurers-Bronze dragons thrive on simple challenges such as riddles and harmlesscontests. They are fascinated by warfare and will eagerly join an army ifthe cause is just and the pay is good.At birth, a bronze dragon's scales are yellow tinged with green, show^ing only a hint of bronze. As the dragon approaches adulthood, its colordeepens slowly changing to a rich bronze tone that gets darker as Lhedragon ages. Dragons Irom the very old stage and on develop a blue-black tint to the edges of their scales, similar to a patina on ancient bronzearmor or statues.Bronze dragons speak their own tongue, a tongue common to all gooddragons, and 16% of hatchling bronze dragons have an ability to com¬municate with any intelligent creature. The chance to possess this abilityincreases 5% per age category of the dragon.Combat: Bronze dragons dislike killing creatures with animal intelli¬gence and would rather bribe them (perhaps with food), or force themaway with repubiort When confronted with intelligent opponentsbronze dragons use their ESP ability to learn their opponents' intentions.When attacking they blind their opponents with wail of fog, then charge.Or. If they are flying, they will snatch opponents. When fighting underwater, they use airy muter to maintain the effectiveness of their breathweapons, and to keep away purely aquatic opponents. Against boats orships they summon a storm or use their tail slap to smash the vesselshulls. If the dragon is inclined to be lenient, seafaring opponents mightmerely find themselves becalmed, fog bound, or with broken masts.Breath weapon special abilities; A bronze dragon has two breath weap¬ons: a stroke of Ughtnmg 100 r long and 5 r wide ora cloud of repulsion gas20' long. 30' wide, and 30' high. Creatures caught in the gas must save vs.breath weapon or move away from the dragon for two minutes per agelevel of the dragon, plus 1-6 minutes, Creatures caught in the lightningtake damage, save vs. breath weapon for half, A bronze dragon casts itsspells and uses its magical abilities at 6th level plus its combat modifier.At birth, bronze dragons have a mater breathing ability, can speaku>ifb animals at will, and are immune to electricity. As they age, they gainlhe following additional powers: Young: create food and water and poly¬morph self three times a day (Each change in form lasts until the dragonchooses a different form. Reverting to the dragon's normal form does notcount as a change.) Juvenile: tun/J of fog once a day, Adult: ESP threetimes a day. Mature adult; airy xuafer three times a day in a 10' radius perage category of the dragon. Old: weather summoning once a day.Ha bi ta 1/Society: Bronze dragons like t o be near d eep fresh or salt water.They are good swimmers and often visit the depths to cool off or to huntfor pearls or treasure from sunken ships. They prefer caves that are acces¬sible only from the water, but their lairs are always dry—they do not layeggs, sleep, or store treasure under water.Bronze dragons are fond of sea mammals, especially dolphins andwhales. These animals provide the dragons with a wealth of informationon shipwrecks, which the dragons love to plunder, and detail the hauntsof large sharks. Bronze dragons detest pirates, disabling or destroyingtheir ships.Ecology; Bronze dragons eat aquatic plants and some varieties of sea¬food, They especially prize of shark meat. They also dine on an occasion¬al pearl and, like other dragons, can eat almost anything in a pinch. Evilamphibious sea creatures (particularly sahuaginl who can invade theirair filled lairs, are their greatest ertemies.
3 + special1-6/1-6/5-20SpecialVariableVariableG (36' base)Elite (16 base)VariableCopper dragons are incorrigible pranksters, joke teller and Fiddlers,They are prideful and are not good losers, although they are reasonablygood winners. They are particularly selfish and greedy for their align¬ment, and have an almost neutral outlook where wealth is concerned.At birth, a copper dragon s scales have a ruddy brown color with acopper tint. As the dragon gets older, the scales become finer and morecoppery, assuming a soft, warm gloss by the time the dragon becomes ayoung adult. Beginning at the venerable stage, the dragons' scales pick upa green tint.Copper dragons speak their own tongue, a tongue common to all gooddragons, and 14% of hatchling copper dragons have an ability to com¬municate with any intelligent creature. The chance to possess this abilityincreases 5% per age category of the dragonCombat: Copper dragons like to taunt and annoy their opponents, hopingthey will give up or become angry and act foolishly. Early in an encounter, acopper dragon will jump from one side of an opponent to another, landing oninaccessible or vertical stone surfaces. If there are no such places around adragons lair, the dragon will create them ahead of time using stone shape,move earth and wall of stone. An angry copper dragon will mire its oppo¬nents using rock fu mud, and will force victims who escape the mud, into itwith kicks. Once opponents are trapped in the mud, the dragon will crushthem with a wall of stone or snatch them and carry them aloft. When lightingairborne opponents, a dragon will draw its enemies into narrow, stony gorgeswhere it can use its spider climb ability in an attempt to maneuver the enemyinto colliding with the walls.Breath weapon.special abilities; A copper dragon s breath weapon is ei¬ther a cloud of s/cnr gas 30 long, 20’ wide, and 20' high or a spurt of acid70' long and 5 r wide. Creatures caught in the gas must save vs. breathweapon or be slowed for three minutes per age level of the dragon. Crea¬tures caught in the acid take damage, save vs, breath weapon for half. Acopper dragon casts its spells and uses its magical abilities at 7th level,plus its combat modifier.At birth, copper dragons can spider climb (stone surfaces only) and areimmune to acid, As they age, they gain the following additional powers:Young: neutralize poison three times a day. juvenile: stone shape twice aday. Adult: forge! once a day. Mature adult: rock to thud once a day. Old:mooc earth once a day. Great wyrm: tualJ of stone once a day. A copperdragon can jump 30 yards forward or sideways, reaching heights up to20 r at mid jump. They can jump 30' straight up,Habitat/Sodety: Copper dragons like dry, rocky uplands and moun¬ts . They lair in narrow caves and often conceal the entrances usingtr joe earth and stone shape. Within the lair, they construct twisting maz¬es with open tops. These allow the dragons to fly or jump over intrudersstruggling through the mare.Copper dragons appreciate wit, and will usually leave good or neutralcreatures alone if they can relate a joke, humorous story or riddle thedragon has not heard before. They quickly gei annoyed with creatureswho don't laugh at their jokes or do not accept the dragons tricks andantics with good humor.Because Lhey often inhabit hills in sight of red dragons' lairs conflictsbetween the two subspecies often occur. Copper dragons usually run farcover until they can equal the odds.Ecology: Copper dragons are determined hunters, the good sport ahunt provides is at least as important as they food they get. They areknown to eat almost anything, including metal ores. However, they prizegiant scorpions and other large poisonous creatures (they say the venomsharpens their with The dragon's digestive system can handle the venomsafely, although injected venoms affect them normally.
Gold dragons are wise, judicious, and benevolent. They often embark on self-appointed quests to promote goodness, and are not easily distracted fromthem. They hate injustice and foul play A gold dragon frequently assumeshuman or animal guise and usually will be encountered disguised,At birth, a gold dragon's scales are dark yeHow with golden metallicflecks. The flecks get larger as the dragon matures until, at the adultstage, the scales grow completely goldenGold dragons speak their own tongue, a tongue common to all gooddragons, and 18% of hatchling gold dragons have an ability to communi¬cate with any intelligent creature. The chance to possess this ability in¬creases 5% per age category of the dragon.Com bat: G old dragons usual I y pa r ley befo re comba t. Whe n con vers i ngwith intelligent creatures they use detect Ire and detect gems spells to gainthe upper hand. In combat, they quickly use Hess and Jack bonus. Olderdragons use /uck bonus at the start of each day if the duration is a day ormore. They make heavy use of spells in combat. Among their favoritesare steep, stinking doud r slow, fire shield, cbudkill , globe of invulnera¬bility, delayed blast fireball and maze.Breath weapon special abilities: A gold dragon has two breath weap¬ons: a cone of fire 90' long, 5* wide at the dragon's mouth, and 30’ wide atthe end or a cloud of potent chlorine gas 50' long, 40' wide, and 30' high.Creatures caught in either effect are entitled to a save versus breath weap¬on for half damage.A gold dragon casts its spells and uses Us magical abilities at 11th level,plus its combat modifier. Unlike other dragons, most gold dragons seekformal magical training. These dragons own spell books and always haveuseful spells.At birth, gold dragons have water breathing ability, can speak withanimals freely, and are immune to fire and gas. They can also polymorphself three times a day. Each change in form lasts until the dragon choosesa different form; reverting to the dragon’s normal form does not count asa change, A gold dragon s natural form has wings. However, they some¬times choose a wingless form to facilitate swimming, gaining the higherswimming rate listed above. A gold dragon in any w ingless form can flyat a speed of 6 (MC ElAs they age, they gain the following additional powers- Young: bless threetimes a day Juvenile: detect lie three times a day. Adult: mtimal summoningonce a day Mature adult: htek bonus once a day. Old; qwesf once a day anddefect gems three times a day. (This allows the dragon to know the numberand kind of precious stones within a 30' radius, duration is one minuteThe luck bonus power of mature adults is used to aid good adventur¬ers. By touch, the dragon can enchant one gem to bring good luck. Thegem is usually one which has been embedded in the dragon's hide. Whenthe dragon carries the gem, it and every good creature in a 10’ radius perage category of the dragon receives a +1 bonus to all Saving Throws andsimilar dice rolls, cf. sfone of good luck. If the dragon gives a gem toanother creature only the bearer gets the bonus. The enchantment laststhree hours per age category of the dragon, plus 1-3 hours. The enchant¬ment ends if the gem is destroyed before its duration expires.Habitat Society: Gold dragons can live anywhere. Their lairs are se¬cluded and always made of solid stone, either caves or castles. These usu¬ally have loyal guards: either animals appropriate to the terrain, or stormor good cloud giants. The giants usually serve as guards through a mutu¬al defensive agreement.Ecology; Gold dragons can eat almost anything, however, they usuallysustain themselves on pearls or small gems, Gold dragons who receivepearls and gems from good or neutral creatures will usually be favorablyinclined toward the gift bringers, as long as the gift is not presented as acrass bribe. In the latter case, the dragon will accept the gift, but reactcynically to any requests the giver makes,
3 + special1 -6/1-8/5-30 (5d6)SpecialVariableVariableG (48 p base)Fanatic (17-18)VariableSilver dragons are kind and helpful. They will cheerfully assist good crea¬tures if their need is genuine. They often take the forms of kindly old menor fair damsels when associating with people.At birth, a silver dragon s scales are blue-gray with silver highlights. Asthe dragon approaches adulthood* its color slowly lightens to brightlygleaming silver. An adult or older silver dragon has scales so fine that theindividual scales are scarcely visible. From a distance, these dragons lookas if they have been sculpted from pure metal.Silver dragons speak their own longue, a tongue common to all gooddragons r and 16% of hatchling silver dragons have an ability to commu¬nicate with any intelligent creature. The chance to possess this ability in¬creases 5% per age category of the dragon.Combat: Silver dragons are not violent and avoid combat except whenfaced with highly evil or aggressive foes. If necessary, they use feat her fallto stop any missiles fired at them. They use teal! of fog or control weatherto blind or confuse opponents before making melee attacks. If angry, theywill use reverse gravity to fling enemies helplessly into the air, where theycan be snatched. When Faced with flying opponents, a silver dragon willhide in clouds (often creating some with control weather on dear days!,remain there using cloud walking, then jump to the attack when theyhave the advantage.Breath Weapon Special Abilities; A silver dragon has two breath weap¬ons; a corn* of cold 80' long. S' wide at the dragon's mouth, and 30' wideat the end or a cloud of paralyzation gas 50' long, 40' wide, and 20' high.Creatures caught in the gas must save versus breath weapon or becomeparalyzed for one minute per age level of the dragon, plus 145 minutes,Creatures caught in the cold are allowed a save versus breath weapon forhalf damage. A silver dragon casts its spells and uses its magical abilitiesat 6th level, plus its combat modifier.At birth, silver dragons are immune tu cold, and can polymorph self threetimes a day. Each change in form lasts until the dragon chooses a differentform and reverting to their normal form does not count as a change. Theyalso can thud umlk, This allows the dragon to tread on clouds or fog asthough Ihey were solid ground. The ability functions continuously but can benegated or resumed at will As they age, they gain the following additionalpowers: Young: feather fall twice a day. juvenile wall of fog once a day.Adult; control winds three times a day. Mature adult: con fro/ weather once aday Old: reverse gravity once a day*Habitat Society: Silver dragons prefer aerial lairs on secluded mountainpeaks, or amid the clouds themselves, When they lair in clouds there al¬ways will be an enchanted area with a solid floor for laying eggs andstoring treasure.Silver dragons seem to prefer human form to their own, and often havemortal companions, Frequently they share deep friendships with mortals.Inevitably, however, the dragon reveals its true Form and lakes its leaveto live a dragon s life for a time,Ecology; Silver dragons prefer human food, and can live on such fareindefinitely.Because they lair In simHar territories, silver dragons come into conflictwith red dragons. Duels between the two species are furious and deadly,but silver dragons generally get the upper hand since they are more capa¬ble of working together against their foes and often have human allies.
Brown dragons, also known as great desert dragons, migrated from thedesert Raurirt and now frequent much of the wastes in EasternMulhorand. Brown dragons are ferocious beasts; while they are rnteili-gent, they view human beings as food, and believe It peculiar to talk withone's meal. They do not have wings and cannot fly,Brown dragons have a col oration similar to that of desert sands, rang¬ing from dim brown at hatchling stage to almost white at great wyrmstage. They have small, webbed daws that are well developed for dig¬ging, and very large, long mouths. Their scales are leathery and not ashard as other dragon armors.Brown dragons speak their own tongue and the language of blue drag'ons. They have a 5% chance per age category of being able to communi¬cate with any intelligent creature.Combat: Brown dragons prefer to dig deep trenches in the sand and waitfor prey to appear so they may ambush them. They have a 90% chance ofhearing a man-sized creature's footsteps on the desert sands from as fardown as 500 feet.Brown dragons breach the desert sand with incredible silence, impos¬ing a - 5 penalty to opponents surprise rolls. Older brown dragons useillusions or even invisibility spells to conceal themselves.When brown dragons grab their prey, they hold it in their law?, l ahingit to their lairs to be eaten when it is most convenient.The brown dragons breath weapon is a powerful acid, which it spewsin a 5-foot-wide spray that extends in a straight line from the dragon'shead up to 60 feet. All creatures caught in the spray can roll a savingthrow vs, breath weapon for half damage.Brown dragons use the spray against large numbers but not againstmounted foes, since they know that horses are good eating and don't putup as much struggle as humans. Brown dragons cast spells as Sth-levelwizards.They are bom immune tn acid and the effects of the desert heat. Theymay survive in airless environments nearly indefinitely.As they age, brown dragons gain the following abilities-Cast creme sand to cover up their burrowsCast create water once per dayCast sandstorm (MuJhorandi spell) once per dayCan summon a I2-HD earth elementalCast disintegrate once per dayHa bit at’ Society; Brown dragons are found in deserts, often close to set¬tled areas. They typically dwell in deep burrows nearly 1,000 feet be¬neath the sand, where they carve out vast chambers.The brown dragon mates and raises a family for only a short period oftime; all parents encountered are in the mature adult stage of develop¬ment. Many brown dragons do not mate.Man is the main enemy of brown dragons. Humans hunt them for theirhides and treasure. Blue dragons also attack brown dragons.Battles between brown and blue dragons are legendary for their feroci¬ty The people of the desert have a curious respect for the brown dragon,so tales often make the blue dragons more evil than the brown.Ecology: Brown dragons are able to digest sand and other min- era! mate¬rials to sustain themselves over long periods of rime, However, meat isthe preferred diet, with horseflesh being a particular favorite.
3 + special1-10/1-10/3-36SpecialVariableVariableG (66' base)Fanatic (17)VariableCloud dragons are reclusive creatures that dislike intrusions. They rarelyconverse, but if persuaded to do so they tend to be taciturn and aloofThey have no respect whatsoever for creatures that cannot fly withoutassistance from spells or devices.At birth, cloud dragons have silver-white scales tinged with red at theedges. As they grow, the red spreads and lightens to sunset orange. At themature adult stage and above, the red~orange color deepens to red goldand almost entirely replaces the silver.Cloud dragons speak their own tongue and a tongue common to allneutral dragons. Also, 17% of hatchling cloud dragons can speak withany intelligent creature. The chance to possess this ability increases 5%per age category.Combat: Cloud dragons are as likely to avoid combat (by assumingcloud form) as they are to attack. When attacking, they use their breathweapon to scatter foes, then cast solid fog and use their weather manipu¬lation abilities to blind and disorient their foes. When very angry theyconjure storms with control weather spells, then they call lightning. Theylike to use slmkmg doud and control Winds spells against flying oppo¬nents.Breath Weapon Special Abilities A doud dragon's breath weapon is an leyblast of air that is 140 feel long, 30 feet high, and 30 feet wide. Creaturescaught in the blast suffer damage from cold and flying ice crystals. Further¬more. all creatures three size classes or more smaller than the dragon areblown head over heels for 2dl2 feet, plus 3 feet per age category of the drag¬on . Character? who can grab solid objects won t be carried away unless theyfail Strength checks: creatures with claws, suction cups, etc,, can avoid theeffect if they have a suitable surface to cling to,A cloud dragon casts its spells and uses its magical abilities at 6th levelplus its combat modifier.They can assume (or leave) a cohesive, cloud-like form at will, onceper round. In this form, they are 75% unlikely to be distinguished fromnormal douds; when in cloud form, their Armor Class improves by “3and their magic resistance increases by 15%. Cloud dragons can use theirspells and innate abilities while in cloud form, but they cannot attackphysically or use iheir breath weapon, tn cloud form, cloud dragons flyat a speed of 12 IMG: A).As they age, doud dragons gain the following additional powers: VeryyoLingr solid fog twice a day. Young: stinking cloud twice a day. Juvenile:create water twice a day (affects a maximum of three cubic yards (81 cu¬bic feet 1) Adult; abscurement three times a day, Mature adult: call light¬ning twice a day. Old: weather summoning twice a day. Very old: controlweather twice a day. Ancient: control winds twice a day.Habitat'Soriety; Cloud dragons lair in magical doud islands wherethere is at least a small, solid floor for laying eggs and storing treasure.Very rarely, they occupy cloud-shrouded mountain peaksCloud dragons are solitary 95% of the time, Jf more than one is en¬countered it is a single parent with offspring.Ecology: Like all dragons, doud dragons can eat just aboui anythingThey seem to subsist primarily on rain water, hailstones and the occa¬sional bit of silver.Because they inhabit in similar territories, doud dragons come intoconflict with silver dragons. Despite their higher intelligence, cloud drag¬ons usually lose such confrontations because of the silver dragons' sec¬ondary breath weapons and ability to muster allies.
3 +special3-12/3-12/3-24See belowVariableVariableH (24' base)Deep dragons are little known on the surface world. They are the huntersof the Underdark. Cunning and patient, they place their survival, fol¬lowed by their joy of hunting, above ail else. Deep dragons carefullyamass and hide treasure in various caches, guarded with traps and magic.They are able to use most magical items.Deep dragons are an iridescent maroon when they hatch, soil- scaled,and unable to change form. They keep to their birth-lair until they havemastered both of their other iorms-a giant winged worm or snake and ahuman (or drew) form.Combat: Deep dragons burrow and tight with powerful, stone- rendingdaws. They love to fight and hunt prey through the lightless caverns ofthe Underdark, employing their various forms. In snake form, they areAC 6. MV 9, H 4(D), Sw 11. losing daw attacks, but gaining a constric¬tion attack (attack roll required, inflicts 3d8 points of damage per roundhampers movement spellcasting, and causes -1 on attack rolls and a 1-point AC penalty).In human form, a deep dragon is AC 10, MV 12, Sw 12, and causesdamage by spell or weapon type. Armor can be worn, but it Is alwaysdestroyed (inflicting 2d4 points of damage to the dragon) in any transfor¬mation of shape. A deep dragon can alter its features to resemble anyhumanoid of roughly human size. It is 66% likely to copy a specific beingwell enough to be mistaken for the actual creature,A deep dragon s breath weapon is a cone of Hesh-cmrosive gas 50 feetlong, 40 feet wide, and 30 feet high. Creatures m the cloud can save vs,breath weapon for half damage (if they have dry, exposed skin, they saveagainst the flesh-eating gas at -2). Goth, metal, and wood are not affect¬ed. Leather is treated as dry, exposed skin.Deep dragons cast spells at oth level, adjusted by their combat modi¬fiers. They are bom with ini revision, true seeing, and unerring detectmagic abilities, and immunities to charm, sleep, and hold magic Deepdragons are Immune to extremes ot heat and cold (-3 on each die of daimage taken, to a minimum of 1 hp per die).As deep dragons age, they gain the following additional powers:Juvenile one more form ehange/day (each), regen, Id4 hp/regenerate Id4 hp/6 rounds; free action at willregenerate ld4 hp/4 rounds: levitate 3 times/daytransmute rock to mud and fe/efcmesis 3 times/daymoue earth 3 times/daypasswall and disintegrate 2 iimes/dayone additional use/day of powers gained since Oldage; stone shape 2 rimes/day, tongues once dayrepulsion 3 times/day, affecting all except dragons.One additional use/day of stone shape and tonguesHabitat Society: Deep dragons mam the Underdark and are great explor¬ers. Most often deep dragons are found in well- defended lairs in theUnderdark. They often use their powers to reach caverns inaccessible tomost creatures. Deep dragons often work with drew.Ecology: Deep dragons have been known to eat almost anything, butthey particularly prize the flesh of clams, fish, kuo-toa, and abdeth.They view cloakers and mind flayers as dangerous rivals in the Under¬dark. Deep dragons avoid confrontations with other dragons and neverfight or steal from others of their own kind.
3+special2 - 6 / 2 - 0 / 2-20See belowVariableSee belowMercury dragons are fast, h igh I y-maneuverable creatures with relativelysmall bodies and long tails. Although good in alignment, they are verywhimsical, making and changing decisions frequentlyAt birth, a mercury dragon's scales are dull silver. As it ages, the scalesbecome brighter and brighter,, until at adult age they gain a brilliant mir¬ror finish. Sunlight or other sources of light reflecting off the scales andwings of a mercury dragon can be blinding.Mercuries speak the language of good dragons, but at high speed, sothere’s only a 75% chance of understanding a mercury dragon.Combat: Mercury dragons are as unpredictable when II comes to combatas they are in any other situation. They may parley they might attackInstantly, or. perhaps they may avoid combat entirely. They never at¬tack good-aligned creatures unless sorely provoked.Mercury dragons always use spells in combat, if possible. They arevery creative, and can always figure out some innovative way of usingvirtually any spell to advantage in combat.In addition to the breath weapon and the attack modes shared by aildragons,* mercury dragons can curve the mirror-bright membranes oftheir wings to reflect and concentrate available light (as dim as full moon¬light) into a beam of darling brightness. They can aim the beam at oneenemy per round-at the expense of not being able to use their wing buffet,and the enemy must roll a successful saving throw vs. spell or be blindedfor ld4 +1 rounds. It not using this technique as a weapon, they can usethe beam much like a search-light.A mercury dragon s breath weapon is a beam of brilliant, yellow light.The beam is 5 feet wide and extends 60 feet from the creatures mouthAny creature caught in the beam receives damage from heat (savingthrow for half damage). The heat ol the beam is Intense enough to igniteflammable objects that fail saving throws vs, magical fire,A mercury dragon casts spells and uses magical abilities al the 10thlevel, plus its combat modifier. At birth, mercury dragons are immune tofire and alt magical forms of blindness.They also receive a + 3 bonus to saving throws against light-basedattacks. As they age, they gain the following additional powers:Habitat Society: Mercury dragons are loners by nature, Their mating be¬havior is free-wheeling, fun loving, and generally irresponsible. If a te¬rn ah? becomes impregnated however, the male s protective instincts takeover. Mercuries are very protective of their offspring, and will give theirlives io save them. Offspring usually stay with their parents until theyreach the juvenile age category.Because of their unpredictable, sometimes almost irrational nature,mercuries very rarely have dose relationships with other creatures in thearea. For this reason, mercuries have to depend on magical and mechani¬cal traps and guards to protect their lairs when they arc away.Ecology: Mercury dragons eat anything, but they prefer to feed on metalores, Although they have no venom attacks, the flesh of mercury dragonsis highly poisonous.
Mist dragons are solitary and philosophical. Their favorite activity issitting quietly arid thinking. They hate being disturbed and dislikeconversation.At birth, a mist dragon s scales are shiny blue-white. As the dragonages, the scales darken, becoming blue-gray with metallic silver flecksthat sparkle in sunlight.Mist dragons speak their own tongue and a tongue common to allneutral dragons. Also. 15% of hatchling mist dragons can speak with anyintelligent creature. The chance to possess this ability increases 5% perage category'.Combat: Mist dragons try to avoid encounters by assuming mist form.In combat, they quickly use their breath weapons, then assume mist formand hide in the vapor—where they launch a spell assaultBreath Weapon/Special Abilities; A mist dragon's breath weapon is adoud of scalding vapor that is 90 feet long, 30 feet wide, and 30 feet high.Creatures caught In vapor suffer can roll saving throws vs. breathweapon tor half damage. In still air, the vapor persists for idi +4 rounds:on the second round, it condenses into a clammy, smothering fog thatblinds air-breathing creatures for ld4 rounds and inflicts 3d4 points ofdrowning damage per round for as long as the creature remains in Lhecloud ta successful saving throw vs. breath weapon negates both effects}.A mist dragon casts its spells and uses its magical abilities at oth levelplus its combat modifierMist dragons can assume (or leave) a cohesive, mist-like form at will, onceper round. In this form, they are 75% unlikely to be distinguished fromnormal mist- in mist form, their Armor Gass improves by ~3 and theirmagic resistance increases by 15% They can use their spells and innateabilities while in mist form, but they cannot attack physically or use theirbreath weapon. Mist dragons in mist form can fly at a speed of 9 (MC: A).As they age, they gain the following additional powers: Very young:iffrfer breathing twice a day. Young: tuofl of fog twice a day. Juvenile:create water twice a day (affects a maximum of three cubic yards [81cubic feet |). Adult: control winds three times a day. Mature adult; windwa!/ twice a day. Old: solid fog twice a day. Very old; predict weathertwice a day. Ancient: airy usurer twice a day.Habitat/Society; Mist dragons live near waterfalls, rapids, coastlines,or where rainfall is frequent and heavy. Their lairs are usually largenatural caverns or grottoes that are mist-filled and damp, Forest-dwellingmist dragons occasionally come into conflict with green dragons. Mistdragons greatly resent the green dragons' attempts to intimidate ordominate them: they usually spend several months vainly trying to avoida green dragons advances before losing all patience and launch mg anall-out campaign to destroy or drive away the aggressor. Likewise,coastal mist dragons might have bronze dragons for neighbors. This,however, seldom leads Lo conflict as both dragons are content to leave theothers alone.Mist dragons are loners, and 90% of all encounters are withindividuals. Group encounters are with parents and offspring.Ecology: Mist dragons can eat almost anything, including woodyplants and even mud. However, they draw most of their sustenancedirectly from natural mist or spray They often lie in misty or foggyplaces, thinking and basking in the moisture,
Non-arctic/Ruins, subterranean, andplane of ShadowVery rareSolitary or clan3+special1-6/1-6/3-18SpecialVariableVariableH (21 ’ base)Champion (16)VariableShadow dragons are sly and devious. They are instinctively cunning andare not prone to taking risks.At all ages, a shadow dragon s scales and body are translucent, so thatwhen viewed from a distance it appears to be a mass of shadows.Shadow dragons speak their own tongue and a tongue common to allevil dragons. Also, 17% of hatchling shadow dragons can speak with anyintelligent creature. The chance to possess this ability increases 5% perage category.Combat: Shadow dragons prefer to attack from hiding, usuallyemploying invisibility or hiding in shadows. They use illusion/phantasmspells to contuse and misdirect foes. Older dragons are especially fond oftheir non-detection abilityBreath Weapon 1 Special Abilities: A shadow dragon s breath weapon isa cloud oF blackness that is 40 feet long, 30 feet wide, and 20 feet high,Creatures caught in the doud are blinded for one melee round and lose -V*(round up) of their life energy (levels or Hit Dice): a successful savingthrow vs, breath weapon reduces the loss to Va (round up). The lifeenergy loss persists for a variable number of turns, shown on the tableabove. Negative plane protect inn spells prevent this life energy loss.A character who is reduced to Oor fewer levels lapses into a coma forthe duration of the cloud’s effect,A shadow dragon casts spells and uses iis magical abilities at 6th levelplus its combat modifier.Shadow dragons are bom immune to energy draining and with theability to hide in shadows with 40% chance of success: this abilityincreases 5% per age category to a maximum of 93%.As they age, they gain the following additional powers: Juvenile;mirror image three times a day (id4 + l images]. Adult: dimension doortwice a day. Old: non-defection three times a day Venerable; shadowwalk once a day. Great wyrm: crept? shadows three times a day. (Thisability creates a mass of leaping shadows with a radius of 100 yards,duration one hour, All magical [and normal | light and darkness sourcesare negated for as long as they remain in the radius. Creatures able tohide in shadows can do so in these magical shadows even if under directobservation. Shadow dragons and other creatures from the plane ofShadow can move and attack normally while hiding in these shadows,effectively giving them improved invisibility A successful dispel magicspell banishes the shadows,)HabltalSoriety; Shadow dragons hate both bright light and totaldarkness, preferring variegated lighting with patches of diffuse lighE anddeep, inky shadows. On the Prime Material plane, their lairs arc alwaysplaces Lhal provide shadowy light for most of the day They preferancient ruins, where they can hide underground when the sun is brightand still find shadows above ground during dawn and twilight. In theplane of Shadow, they live in dense thickets of trees and brambles,fortified castles, or labyrinthine caves. In either plane, they prefer tolocate their lairs near colonies of other creatures that can alert them topotential foes or victims. The dragons seldom actually cooperate withthese allies, however, though the dragons commonly prey on them.Shadow dragons love dark-colored, opaque gems, and especially prizeblack stones, They also collect magical items that produce shadows ordarkness, They use these items to turn areas filled with total darkness orlight into masses of shadows.Ecology: Shadow dragons eat almost anything. Their favorite food isrutting carrion, though they often kill for sport. Slain victims are left todecay until they become suitably foul. These dragons are equally fond offrost-killed, waterlogged, or salt-poisoned plants,
Temperate dries (rarely temperatehills, plains, and forests.)3 + special1-10/1-10/3-30SpecialVariableVariableH (25' base)Fanatic (17-18)VariableSled dragons love to have human and demihuman companions, and theyprefer to live amid the hustle and bustle of great cities. They often pose assages, scholars, mages, or other intellectuals.At birth a steel dragon's scales are deep blue-gray with steely high¬lights, As the dragon approaches adulthood, its color slowly lightens tothat of lustrous burnished steel. When these dragons take on humanform, they always have one steel-gray feature-hair, eyes, nails, or same-times a ring or other ornament.Steel dragons speak their own tongue and a tongue common to all neu¬tral dragons. Also, 19% of hatchling steel dragons can speak with artyintelligent creature. This chance increases by 5% per age category.Combat: Steel dragons favor repartee over combat. If pressed, they usu¬ally begin with a spelt assault and avoid melee. If seriously harmed orthreatened, they resume dragon form and use their breath weapons. Theybreathe on any foe they plan to engage in melee, and they seek to keeptheir foes within the cloud until the gas loses its potency.A steel dragon's breath weapon is a cube of toxic gas. The dragon conmonitor the amount of gas released so closely that it can make the cube assmall as it wishes or as large as shown in the table below (the a side of thecube), Creatures caught in the gas must roll successful saving throws vs.poison with a -2 penalty or die instantly. The gas is quickly absorbedthrough the skin and is fust as lethal if inhaled. Coating all exposed skinwith lard or grease offers some protection (saving throw penalty ne¬gated). Victims who succeed with the save suffer the indicated amount ofdamage. In still air, the gas stays active for two melee rounds. Steel drag¬ons are immune to all poi&ons.A steel dragon tan polymorph self five times a day Each change inform lasts until the dragon chooses a different form. Reverting to thedragon's normal form does not count as a change.Steel dragons are immune to wizard spells of 1st to 4th levels and castspells and use their special abilities at 8th level, plus their combat modifier, As they age, they gain the following additional powers:cantrip twice a dayfriends once a daycharm person three times a daysuggestion once a dayenthrall once a dayHabitat-Society: Steel dragons prefer human lodgings that are wellequipped with strung rooms or vaults to protect their treasures,Steel dragons prefer human form to their own, and they always havemortal companions. They are endlessly curious about human and derm-human art, culture, history and politics. They always keep their true na¬ture secret, but they are able to recognize each other.Ecology; Steel dragons prefer human food. Unlike other form shiftingdragons, I hey cannot Hve on such fare indefinitely, as they must eatenough to maintain their true bulk. Once or twice a month, they leavetheir adopted cities and go into the wilderness to hunt for tood, Theyexplain their absences in a way consistent with their human identitiesSteel dragons hate chaotic creatures who seek to disrupt life in cities ordespoil their hunting grounds. In the city the dragons never hesitate toreport troublemakers or to use their special abilities to hunt down crimi¬nals, Ln the wilderness, they prefer swifter forms of justice.
3 + special1-8 H-6/2-16See belowVariableSee belowG (36' base)Champion (15-16)VariableAlthough the existence of yellow dragons has tong been predicted bysages (based on theories oi primary colors), the first specimen was spot¬ted only five or so years ago. The creatures are solitary and secretive,preferring to lay in wait for prey to stumble into carefully-prepared trapsinstead of hunting actively.At birth, yellows have soft, tan scales. As they grow older, the scalesharden and become lighter in color, eventually reaching the grayish yel¬low of desert sands. Their scales always have a dusty texture to them,giving them a finish lhat does not reflect light well. Even their teeth anddaws have a similar finish. No part of the ydlow dragon will glint in thesunlight, thereby giving away its position.Yellow dragons speak their own tongue, which is quite different thanthat spoken by other evil dragons. Yellows have no interest in speakingwith other races, and so they learn no other languages.Combat; Although preferring guile to combat and ambush to attack, yel¬lows are fierce and cunning fighters. Even if forced into a situation wheredirect combat is inevitable, theyll still use their spells and innate abilitiesso as to mislead, misdirect, and distract their opponents.A favorite hunting tactic for a yellow is to dig a steep-walled, cone-shaped depression in the sand, and then bury itself at the bottom oF thisarater with just its eyes and nostrils showing. When a creature stumblesinto the depression, the dragon moves its wings in the sand, causing thesteep walls of the cone to collapse and drawing the prey sLraighL to thedragon's mouth. A yellow dragon casts spells and uses magical abilities atSth level, plus its combat modifier.A yellow dragon s breath weapon is a high-velocity blast of scorchingair mixed with sand. This affects an area 50 feet long. 40 feet wide, and 20feet high. Creatures caught within this blast must roll successful savingthrows vs. breath weapon for half damage. Regardless of the outcome ofthis roll, they must make another saving throw vs, breath weapon. Fail¬ure means that the abrasive sand m the breath blast has damaged theireyes, blinding them for ld4 + 1 roundsYellow dragons are immune to fire and heat and can cast silence, IQ 1radius at will. As they age, they gain the following additional powers:HabiUt/Sodety: Yellow dragons love deserts, preferring areas of sandywindswept desolation. They are most comfortable in daytime tempera¬tures of 105 degrees and up. although they can easily survive subf reelingtemperatures at night. They share much the same territory as brasses:thus the species occasionally come into conflictYellows are solitary, selfish creatures that form no dose bonds with anyother creature, including other yellows. They are highly territorial; theonly time they'd let another yellow into thek territory' is to mate, which isactually quite rare. Immediately afterward, the dragons separate Themother raises the offspring, but won t go out of her way to protect themfrom attackers. The young dragons usually leave home before they reachthe juvenile age category. The main enemies of yellow dragons are brass¬es. which actively hunt the smaller creatures.Ecology: Although able to eat anything, yellows favor fresh meat.(Demi)humans are considered a delicacy, as are the unhatched eggs ofbrass dragons, (Yellows rarely get to enjoy this latter feast J
Dragon turtles are one of the most beautiful, awesome, and fearedcreatures of the water. With their deadly jaws and breath weapon, andtheir penchant for capsizing ships, dragon turtles are dreaded by mari¬ners on large bodies of water, both fresh and salt.When a dragon turtle surfaces, it is sometimes mistaken for the reflec¬tion of the sun or moon on the water. The turtle's rough, deep green shellis much the same color as the deep water the monster favors, and thesilver highlights that line the shell are patterned like light dancing onopen water. The turtles legs and tail are of a lighter green, and they areflecked with golden highlights. The coloration of the creatures head issimilar to the legs and tail, but its crest spines are golden with dark greenwebbing connecting them. A dragon turtles shell can reach to 30 feet indiameter, and an adult turtle can measure over 40 feet from its snout tothe tip of its tail. Dragon turtles speak their own highly-developed lan¬guage.Combat; Though dragon turtles may be mistaken for the pleasantsight of light glinting off of water that illusion is never maintained forlong, Dragon turtles are fierce fighters and will generally attack anycreature that threatens its territory or presents itself as a potential meal,in combat, dragon turtles will usually (90% \ attack with their formida¬ble daws and teeth first. Its shell provides the turtle with excellent pro¬tection. though once the dragon turtle strikes a victim, it rarely needsto rely upon this safeguard.The dragon turtles shell also provides the creature with a weaponto attack ships that foolishly pass through its territory uninvited.Sinking as deep as necessary, the dragon turtle will wait for the shipto pass over tt and then rise up underneath the vessel, using all of itsconsiderable bulk to capsize the unlucky target. Ships under 20 feetin length will be capsized by this attack 95% of the time, vessels from20 to 60 feet long will be capsized 50% of the time, and ships over 60feet will be capsized 20% of the time. Ships not capsized will sustainsome damageIn combat, when neither its bite nor its capsizing attack is enoughto defeat an enemy, a dragon turtle will use its breath weapon. Theturtle can belch forth a cloud of scalding steam that will cover an area60 feet long, 40 feet wide, and 40 feet high, This attack causes 20420points of damage (20d6J, and characters or creatures making a savingthrow vs, breath weapon take half damage. Like true dragons, drag’on turtles can use this deadly breath weapon three times a day.Habilat/Soriety: Dragon turtles are extremely solitary creatures.Large, desolate sea caves and secret underground caverns that can beaccessed only through the water are their favorite lairs, These lairsare difficult to find, but adventurers locating a dragon turtles cavewill find it filled with treasures of all types. The turtle gathers thistreasure, which it will protect to the death, from the ships sunk in itsterritoryA dragon turtle's territory is well-defined and may cover as muchas fifty square miles of open water. Other dragon turtles are allowedinto this area only during mating season, though turtles of the samesex will always fight to the death upon meeting. It is this hostilitytoward their own kind that keeps the number of dragon turtles rela¬tively low.Mariners of any experience recognize the terri torial claims of drag¬on turtles and will often make extravagant tributes to the turtle con¬trolling areas necessary for safe and speedy trade.Ecology: Dragon turtles are carnivorous and will eat almost anycreature, including humans or other dragon turtles, to satisfy theirvoracious appetite* Large fish seem to be the prefered food for drag¬on turtles, and the turtles can often be found lurking in the weeds andmuck at the bottom of a lake or sea waiting for fish to pass. In partic¬ularly poor years for fish, dragon turtles have been known to usetheir breath weapon to kill large groups of sea birds that stray toodose to the water for foodConflict often arises between dragon turtles and the many intelli¬gent aquatic races, like the locathah or mermen, because of competi¬tion for ideal bits. Like many of their land-based relatives, dragonturtles are considered treacherous and selfish by all creatures thatshare their domain.Dragon turtle shells make outstanding shields and armor. Becauseof the shells strength and natural resistance to the dragon turtle'sown breath weapon, armor or a shield made out of this materialgains +1 to its defensive rating. The shield or armor will also save asan item against destruction by fire or steam-based attacks at +4.
Breath weapon, spellsInvisibilitySee belowTd'-l Va' long)Steady (11)A chaotic offshoot of the pseudodragon, the faerie dragon livesin peaceful, tangled forests and thrives on pranks, mischief, andpractical jokes.Faerie dragons resemble miniature dragons with thin bodies,long, prehensile tails, gossamer butterfly wings, and huge smiles.Their colors range through the spectrum, changing as they age,from the red of a hatchling to the black of a great wyrm tseechart). The hides of females have a golden tinge that sparkles inthe sunlight: males have a silver tinge.All faerie dragons can communicate telepathically with oneanother at a distance of up to 2 miles. They speak their own lan¬guage, along with the language of sprites, pixies, elves, and thebirds and animals in their area,Combat: Faerie dragons can become invisible at will, and can at¬tack. use spells, and employ breath weapons while invisible.They attack as 4-HD monsters, biting for 1-2 points of damage,Most (65 %) faerie dragons employ wizard spells as a wizard ofthe level indicated on the accompanying chart: 35% employpriest spells of the following spheres: Animal, Plant, Elemental,and Weather. Almost ail spells are chosen for mischief potential.The two most common spells of faerie dragons are water breath¬ing and legend lore , other favorites include ventriloquism, un¬seen servant, forget , suggestion, distance distortion, limitedwish, obscuremmt, animal growth, and animate rock.A faerie dragon usually begins its attacks by turning invisibleand using its breath weapon, a 2-foot-diameter cloud of euphoriagas. A victim failing a saving throw vs, breath weapon will wan¬der around aimlessly in a state of bliss for the next 3d4 minutes,during which time he is unable to attack and his Armor Class isdecreased by 2, Even though he is unable to attack, the victimcan keep his mind on the situation if he succeeds on an Intelli¬gence check (by roiling his Intelligence score or less on ld20) eachround: if he fails an Intelligence check, he completely loses inter¬est in the matters at hand for the duration of the breath weapon'seffect.Faerie dragons avoid combat and never intentionally inflictdamage unless cornered or defending their lairs. If attacked,however, they engage in spirited defense, ably supported bysprite and pixie friends, until the opponents are driven away.Habitat Society: Faerie dragons make their lairs in the hollow's ofhigh trees, preferably near a pond or stream, because they arequite fond of swimming and diving. They often live in the com¬pany of a group of pixies or sprites.Faerie dragons take advantage of every opportunity to wreakmischief on passers-by, frequently using forest creatures to helpthem in their pranks. Though many of these pranks are sponta¬neous, months of preparation can go into a single, spectacularpractical joke. A tell-tale giggle, which sounds like the tinkling oftiny silver bells, often alerts potential victims to the presence ofinvisible faerie dragons.Ecology: Faerie dragons eat fruit, vegetables, nuts, roots, honey,and grains. They are especially fond of fruit pastries and havebeen known to go to great lengths to get a fresh apple pie.
Although frequently mistaken on first sighting for a young reddragon, the firedrake is neither as intelligent nor as powerful asits dragon cousin. It responds with flame to any stimulus.This small dragonet—4 r long, and a bit over 2‘ tn height—hasthe features and proportions of a miniature red dragon, but itsscaly hide is thinner and more translucent than that of even theyoungest of true dragons. The hide of the dragonet twitches andquivers almost imperceptibly, and is somewhat mottled in color,with mauve and burgundy splotches over the red undercolor.The wings beat slowly even when the dragonet is on the ground.In this manner the firedrake provides air flow to itself, and wardsoff pesky insects. A shimmer of heat rises off of the dragonet atall times.Combat: If a firedrake is disturbed, there is a 50% chance it willattack. Its primary* attack is its breath weapon (fire), which It canuse up to five times daily The fire forms a cone from the snout ofthe dragonet to a 10' diameter circle at the extreme end of its 60'range, and causes 2-16 points on all affected (save vs. breath weap¬on for half damage). The firedrake's claws are not used in combat,but its bite will cause 2-8 points of damage.The dragonet s blood burns fiercely in air, as there is a highphosphorous content to the blood. In fact, the fire-breathing ofthese creatures ts actually the voluntary expelling of a jet of itspyrophoric blood. Because of the flammability of the dragon'sblood, blunt weapons such as staves or clubs are less dangerousthan those which cause blood loss. Any creature making a suc¬cessful slashing or piercing attack on a firedrake must save vs.breath weapon, or take 1-2 points of fire damage.In aerial combaL, the firedrake is particularly fond of attackingairborne creatures from below and behind. The heat from thefiredrake and its breath attack naturally radiates upwards, some¬times disrupting the maneuvers of creatures that depend on rela¬tively smooth air currents for flying or gliding. The firedrake willsometimes simply ram smaller opponents in their soft underbellyin the hope of stunning them and causing them to plummet totheir deaths.Habitat Society: Firedrakes are familial creatures, with a matedmale and female taking up residence in a lair, which is generally asmall cavelet or rocky shelf under a ledge or outcropping, Usu¬ally six to eight eggs are laid and tended by the pair, being keptwarm by the ample heat of the bodies of the parents. The eggs,laid in early summer, take about 60 days to hatch. The youngfiredrakes learn to breathe fire even before they learn to fly, andare even more nervous than the adults, spouting flames severaltimes a day in the lair or nearby during this period, Flight firstoccurs about 60 days after hatching.The parents are very protective of their lair because of theyoung. Although firedrakes normally only range 1-2 miles fromtheir tain they may patrol up to twice that distance during thetimes at which their young are most vulnerable to attack.Firedrakes leave the family lair early in the spring followingtheir hatching, flying sometimes scores of miles before encoun¬tering a firedrake of the opposite sex willing to mate for life andestablish a new lair The rare mating fights that do occur are spec¬tacularly fiery, although one male usually concedes and retreatsbefore the battle becomes lethal.Firedrakes gather no treasure, although they take no specialcare to remove the bones or effects of arty that they defeat.Ecology: Firedrakes have a short lifespan compared with theirlarger cousins, the dragons, usually living only 75 to 100 years.Firedrake blood can be kept, in its liquid state, in a sealed andairtight container, or under water or some other inert liquid. Itcan then be used as a firebomb, equivalent to a torched flask ofoil, or used to create flaming weapons. For instance, swardsdipped in the blood immediately become flaming swords for 3-6melee rounds, although the sudden, intense heat upon the bladecreates a 2% cumulative chance per round of the sword breakingupon impact with each blow struck during the period in whichflame engulfs it. After the flame ends, the sword is otherwise un¬affected.The blood of the firedrake actually bums within its veins, cre¬ating the shimmer of heat that always rises from these creatures.The burning of the blood also requires a high level of oxygen,hence the constant slow beating of the dragonet's wings, even atrest. If deprived of air, it will die of suffocation in about half thetime of a similarly sized creature.
Pseudodragons are a species of small flying lizard that inhabitsheavily forested wilderness areas. These playful, benign crea¬tures have magical powers that they can share with others, sothey are often sought as companions.Pseudodragons resemble miniature red dragons. They havefine scales and sharp horns and teeth, A pseudodragans colora¬tion is red-brown as opposed to the deep red of red dragons. Itstail is about 2 feet long (longer than the pseudodragon itself),barbed, and very flexible.Pseudodragons communicate via a limited form of telepathy. Ifone elects to take a human companion, it can transmit what itsees and hears at a distance of up to 240 yards. Pseudodragonscan vocalize animal noises such as a rasping purr (pleasure), ahiss (unpleasant surprise!, a chirp (desire), or a growl (anger).Combat: The pseudodragon can deliver a vicious bite with Ussmall, dragonlike jaws, but its major weapon is its sting-equipped tail. The creature can move it with flashing speed andstrikes at +4 on attack rolls. Any creature struck must save vs.poison or go into a state of catalepsy that lasts 1-6 days. The vie*tim appears quite dead, but at the end of that time the characterwill either wake up unharmed (75% chance) or die (25 % chance).Pseudodragons have a chameleon like power that allows themto alter their coloration to blend with their surroundings. Theycan blend into any typical forest background with an 80%chance of being undetected by creatures which cannot see invisi¬ble objects. Pseudodragons have infra vision with a 60 foot rangeand can see invisible objects,A pseudodragon is highly map resistant and can transmit thismagic resistance to its human companion via physical contact (apseudodragon likes to be perched on the top of ones head orcurled around the shoulders and upper back).Habitat Society: These forest-dwelling creatures place theirlairs in the hollows of great trees or in large caves.A pseudodragon will very rarely take a human or demihumanas its companion. Some view these pseudodragons as the hu-man s pet; the pseudodragon will be sure to correct this misun¬derstanding. There are two ways to become a pseudodragonscompanion; one is to use magic to summon it (a find familiarspell). Another way is to find the pseudodragon on an adventureand pursuade it to become a companion. The pseudodragon thatsearches for companionship will stalk a candidate silently fordays, reading his thoughts via telepathy judging his deeds to begood or evil. If the candidate is found to be good, the pseudodra¬gon will present itself to the human as a traveling companion andobserve the human 5 reaction. If the human seems overjoyed andpromises to take very good care of it, the pseudodragon will ac¬cept. If not, it will fly away.The persona lity of a pseudodragon has been described by someas catlike. A pseudodragon is willing to serve, provided that it iswell-fed. groomed, and receives lots of attention. At times apseudodragon seems arrogant, demanding, and less than willingto help. In order to gain its full cooperation, the companion mustpamper the pseudodragon and make it feel as though it were themost important thing in his life. If the pseudodragon is mistreat¬ed or insulted it will leave, or worse, play pranks when least ex*pected. Pseudodragons particularly dislike cruelty and will notserve cruel masters.Ecology: Pseudodragons are omnivorous but prefer to eatmeat. Their diet consists chiefly of rodents and small birds withoccasional leaves, fruits, and berries, In the wild, pseudodragonslive solitary lives, protecting small personal hoards in their nests.They gather to mate once per year, in early spring, when gather¬ings of dozens of pseudodragons are not uncommon. After mat¬ing, males and females separate; females lay speckled brown eggsin clutches of four to six which hatch in mid-summer: femalesraise the young by themselves. Pseudodragons hibernate inwinter; the young leave the nest in spring to mate.Pseudodragons have a lifespan of 10*15 years. Like dragons,they are attracted to bright shiny objects. Pseudodragon eggs canbe resold for up to 10,000 gold pieces while a hatchling is worthas much as 20,000 gold pieces.
Possessing some oi the most dangerous qualities of a lion and abrass dragon, the dragonne is a vicious and deadly hunter, and athreat to many who travel in warmer climates.From a distance, a dragonne looks much like a giant lion, withthe one very notable exception of the pair of small, brass-coloredwings that stretch from the creatures shoulders. Upon closer in¬spection, other differences between the dragonne and its felineancestor become apparent, too. The dragonne is covered withthick, brass-colored scales, much like a brass dragon, and itsmane is much thicker and made of far coarser hair than a lion's,The beast also possesses huge claws and fangs, and large eyes,usually brass-colored like its scales. Dragonnes do not have theirown language. Instead, they speak the languages of brass drag¬ons and sphinxes.Combat: Dragonnes usually attack first with their front daws, in¬flicting Idfi points of damage with each set, and their terrible jaws,inflicting 3d6 points of damage. This is usually enough to slay mostof the creatures the dragonne encounters. If a dragonne is in combatwith an especially deadly opponent, or is wounded in a battle with alesser opponent, however, it will use its deadly roar.A dragonne s roar causes weakness (due to fear) in all creatureswithin 120 feet of the monster* unless they roll successful savingthrows vs. paralyzation. Those creatures that save are not affect¬ed, but those that fad to save lose 50% of their Strength for 2d6rounds. Worse still, any creature within 30 feet of the dragonnewhen it roars are deafened for 2d6 rounds* No save is possibleagainst the deafening aspect of the dragonne s roar, and all affect¬ed creatures cannot hear any sound and fight with a -1 penalty toattack rolls (due to disorientation),The dragonrte's roar is like a dragon s breath weapon in that itcan only be used three times a day. Creatures within the range ofthe dragonnes roar must roll saving throws vs, fear each timethey hear it. Once a creature is deafened, however, it cannot hearthe dragonnes roar, and need not save against it, until the 2dbrounds of temporary deafness are over.Although a dragonne's wings are useful only for short periodsof time, carrying the creature for only 1-3 turns at a time, thedragonne uses its wings very effectively in battle. If any creaturesattempt to charge the dragonne or encircle it, the dragonne sim¬ply takes to the air and finds a more defensible position, The dra~gonne prefers not to fight in the air, as it is very slow andmaneuvers poorly compared to most flying creatures. It can fightwith its claws and bite, and even its roar, when airborne, so itremains almost as deadly in the air as on the ground,Habitat/Society: Dragonnes prefer to dwell in rocky foothillsand deserts. They lake large, natural caves for their lairs andstore their small amounts of treasure, usually taken from slainadventurers, in loose piles around their rocky homes* Their terri¬tories are usually very large, as they generally inhabit desolateareas.They cannot bear the company of other dragonnes, and thecreatures are found in pairs only during their brief mating sea¬son, late in the autumn, Dragonnes lay eggs, like their reptilianancestors, and only one egg is produced a year by any dragonne.The female raises this young dragonne for one year, after whichtime even a mother and her young will be unfriendly if they meet.Male dragonnes are always antagonistic toward each other.In fact, dragonnes get along wiLh very few T creatures, and areconsidered a menace by most sentient races. More than anything,however, dragonnes wish to be left alone to hunt.Ecology: The dragonne prefers herd animals like goats forfood, especially since they don't fight back as fiercely as humans.It only attacks a human or demihuman for food if no other gameis available.Dragonnes are not necessarily aggressive toward strangers, andthe creature's reputation as a mindless devourer of helpless travelersis more the product of ignorance than well-researched fact. A dra¬gonne will almost always attack any creature that invades its lair orthreatens its territory. This means that adventurers w f ho stumbleacross a dragonnes cave or settlers who decide to build in a dra-gormes territory are often subject to fierce and immediate attack.Creatures not threatening the dragonnes lair or simply passingthrough its territory are usually left alone. Though the dragonnesintelligence is low. It can tell the difference between a harmless trav¬eler and a potentially troublesome settler.
Dryads are beautiful, intelligent tree sprites. They are as elusiveas they are alluring, however, and dryads are rarely seen unlesstaken by surprise—or they wish to be spotted.The dryad s exquisite features, delicate and finely chiseled, aremuch like an elf maiden's. Dryads have high cheek bones andamber, violet, or dark green eyes. A dryad's complexion and haircolor changes with the seasons, presenting the sprite with naturalcamouflage. During the fall a dryad's hair turns golden or red.and her skin subtly darkens from its usual light tan to moreclosely match her hair color. This enables her to blend with thefalling leaves of autumn. In winter, both the dryad's hair and skinare white, like the snows that cover the oak groves. When en¬countered in a forest during fall or winter, a dryad is often mis¬taken for an attractive maid, probably of elvish descent. No onewould mistake a dryad for an elf maid during the spring and sum¬mer, however. At these times of year, a dryad's skin is lightlytanned and her hair is green like the oak leaves around her.Dryads often appear clothed in a loose, simple garment. Theclothing they wear is the color of the oak grove in the season theyappear. They speak their own tongue, as well as the languages ofelves, pixies, and sprites. Dryads can also speak with plants.Combat: Dryads are shy, nonviolent creatures. They rarelycarry weapons, but they sometimes carry knives as tools.Though a dryad can use this as a weapon in a fight, she will notresort to using a knife unless seriously threatened.Dryads have the ability to throw a powerful charm personspell three times a day (but only once per round). This spell is sopowerful that targets of the spell suffer a -3 penalty to their sav¬ing throws. A Dryad always uses this spell if seriously threat¬ened, attempting to gain control of the attacker who could helpher most against his comrades. Dryads will only attempt tocharm elves as a last resort because of their natural resistance tothis type of spell.The dryad's use of her ability to charm is not limited to combatsituations, however. Whenever a dryad encounters a male with aCharisma of 16 or more, she usually tries to charm him. Charis¬matic victims of a dryad's attentions are taken to the tree sprite'shome, where the men serve as amorous slaves to their beautifulcaptors. There is a 50% chance that a person charmed and takenaway by a dryad will never return. If he does escape from thedryads charms, it will be after ld4 years of captivity.This tree sprite also has two other powers that are very usefulin defense. Unless surprised, a dryad has the ability to literallystep through a tree and then dimension door to the oak tree she ispart of . She can also speak with plants (as the 4lh-level priestspell), This enables the dryad to gather information about partiestraveling near her tree, and even to use vegetation to hinder po¬tential attackers,HabitahSoriety; Some legends claim that dryads are the ani¬mated souls of very old oak trees. Whether this is really the case,it is true that dryads are attached to a single, very large oak treein their lifetimes and cannot, for any reason, go more than 360yards from that tree. If a dryad does wander farther away, shebecomes weak and dies within 6d6 hours unless returned to herhome. The oak trees of dryads do not radiate magic, but some¬one finding a dryad's home has great power over her, A dryadsuffers damage for any damage inflicted upon her home tree.Any attack on a dryad's tree will, of course, bring on a frenzieddefense by the dryad.Although dryads are generally very solitary, up to six havebeen encountered in one place. This is rare, however. All this re¬ally means is that a number of dryad oaks are within 100 yards ofone another and the dryads' paths cross. These dryads may cometo each other's aid, but never really gather socially. .Any treasureowned by a tree sprite is hidden dose to her home tree. The goldand gems that make up a dryads treasure are almost always thegifts of charmed adventurers.These tree sprites realize that most humans and demihumansfear them for their ability to charm, so dryads only deal withstrangers on rare occasions. When approadied carefully, how¬ever, dryads have been known to aid adventurers. They are auseful source of information, too, as they know a great dealabout the area in which they live.Ecology: Dryads are staunch protectors of the forest andgroves in which they reside. Any actions that harm the area, andespecially its plant life, are met with little tolerance.Dwarves are a noble race of demihumans who dwell under theearth, forging great cities and waging massive wars against theforces of chaos and evil. Dwarves also have much in commonwith the rocks and gems they love to work, for they are bothhard and unyielding* It s often been said that it's easier to make astone weep than it is to change a dwarf's mind.Standing from four to 4Vz feet in height, and weighing 130 to170 pounds, dwarves tend to be stocky and muscular. They haveruddy cheeks and bright eyes* Their skin is typically deep tan orlight brown* Their hair is usually black, gray, or brown, andworn long, though not long enough to impair vision in any way*They iavor long beards and mustaches, too* Dwarves value theirbeards highly and tend to groom them very carefully. Dwarvesdo not favor ornate stylings or wrappings for their hair or theirbeards.Dwarven clothing tends to be simple and functional* They of¬ten wear earth tones, and their cloth is considered rough bymany other races, especially men and elves. Dwarves usuallywear one or more pieces of jewelry, though these items are usu¬ally not of any great value or very ostentatious* Though dwarvesvalue gems and precious metals, they consider It in bad taste toflaunt wealth*Because dwarves are a sturdy race, they add 1 to their initialConstitution ability scores. However, because they are a solitary'people, tending toward distrust of outsiders and other races, theysubtract 1 from their initial Charisma ability scores* Dwarvesusually live from 350 to 450 years.Dwarves have found it useful to learn the languages of manyof their allies and enemies. In addition to their own languages,dwarves often speak the languages of gnomes, goblins, kobolds.ores, and the common tongue, which is frequently used in tradenegotiations with other races.Combat: Dwarves are courageous, tenacious fighters who areill-disposed toward magic. They never use magical spells or trainas wizards, though they can become priests and use the spells ofthis group Because of their nonmagical nature, in fact they get aspecial bonus to all saving throws against magical wands, staves,rods, and spells* Dwarves receive a +1 bonus to saving throwsagainst these magical attacks for every Vfa points of Constitu¬tion score they have. See Table 9 on page 21 of the Player's Hand¬book for specific bonuses.A dwarf's nonmagical nature can also cause problems when hetries to use a magical item. In fact, if a dwarf uses a magical itemthat it not specifically created for his class, there is a 20% chancethe item malfunctions* For example, if a dwarven fighter uses abag of holding —which can be used by any class, not justfighters—there is a 20% chance each time the dwarf uses it thatthe bag does not work properly* This chance of malfunction ap¬plies to rods, slaves, wands, rings, amulets, potions, horns,jewels, and miscellaneous magic. However, dwarves havelearned to master certain types of magical items—because of anitems military nature* These objects—specifically weapons,shields, armor, gauntlets, and girdles—are not subject to magicalmalfunction when used by a dwarf of any class,As with magical attacks, dwarves are unusually resistant totoxic substances. Because of their exceptionally strong Constitu¬tion, all dwarves roll saving throws against poisons with thesame bonus (+1 for every 3Vz points of Constitution score) thatapplies to saves vs. magical attacks.In the thousands of years that dwarves have lived in the earth,they have developed a number of skills and special abilities thathelp them to survive. All dwarves have infravision that enablesthem to see up to 60 feet in the dark. When underground,dwarves can tell quite a bit about their location by looking care¬fully at their surroundings. When within 10 feet of what they arelooking for, dwarves can detect the grade and slope of a passage<1-5 on ld6), new tunnel construction (1-5 on ld6), sliding/shifting walls or rooms (1-4 on ld6). and stonework traps, pits,and deadfalls (1-3 on ld6J. Dwarves can also determine their ap¬proximate depth underground (1-3 on ld6) at any time.During their time under the earth, dwarves have also devel¬oped an intense hatred ot many of the evil creatures they com¬monly encounter. Thus, in melee, dwarves always add 1 to theirattack rolls to hit ores, half-ores, goblins, and hobgoblins. Thesmall size of dwarves is an advantage against ogres, trolls, ogremagi, giants, and titans; these monsters always subtract 4 Fromtheir attack rolls against dwarves because of that size differenceand the dwarves' training in fighting such large foes.Dwarven armies are well-organized and extremely well-disciplined. Dwarven troops usually wear chain mail and carryshields in battle. They wield a variety of weapons. The composi¬tion of a typical dwarven army by weaponry is axe and hammer(25%) sword and spear (20% ) T sword and Iighl crossbow' {15%),sword and pole arm (10% ), axe and heavy crossbow (10%), axeand mace (10%), or hammer and pick (10%).For every 40 dwarves encountered, there is a 2nd- to othdevelfighter who leads the group, (Roll ld6 to determine level, with aroll of 1 equalling 2.) If there are 160 or more dwarves encoun¬tered, there are, in addition to the leaders of the smaller groups,one 6th-level fighter (a chief) and a 4th-level fighter (lieutenant)commanding the troops. If 200 or more dwarves are encoun¬tered. there is a fighter.‘priest of 3rd- to Dth-level fighting abilityand 4th-to 7th4evel priest ability, tf a dwarven army has 320 ormore troops in it, the following high-level leaders are in com¬mand of the group: an Stb-level fighter, a 7th-levei fighter, a 6th-leve] Bghter/7th-level priest, and two 4th-leve! fighter/priests.The commanders of the dwarven troops wear plate armor andcarry shields. In addition, the fighters and fighter/priests leadingthe dwarven troops have a 10% chance per level of fighting abili¬ty of having magical armor and 'or weapons. The fighter/priestswho lead the troops also have a 10% chance per level of priestability of having a magical item specific to priests {and thus notsubject to malfunction).If encountered in its home, a dwarven army has, in addition tothe leaders noted above. 2d6 fighters of from 2nd- to Sth-level(ld4 + l for level), 2d4 fighter priests of from 2nd- to 4th-level(in each classl females equal to 50% of the adult males, and chil¬dren equal to 25% of the adult males. Dwarven women areskilled in combat and fight as males if their homes are attacked.Habitat Society: Usually constructed around profitable mines,dwarven cities are vast, beautiful complexes carved into solidstone. Dwarven cities take hundreds of years to complete, butonce finished they stand for millennia without needing any typeof repair. Since dwarves do not leave their homes often and al¬ways return to them, they create their cities with permanence inmind. Troops guard dwarven cities at all times, and sometimes(60% chance) dwarves also use animals as guards—either 2d4brown bears (75% chance) or 5d4 wolves (25% chance).Dwarven society is organized into dans. A dwarven dan notalready attached to a city or mine travels until it finds an outpostwhere it can begin to ply a trade. Clans often settle close togethersince they usually need the same raw materials for their crafts.Clans are competitive, but usually do not war against one an¬other. Dwarven cities are founded when enough clans move to aparticular location.Each dwarven clan usually specializes in a particular craft orskill; young dwarves are apprenticed at an early age to a master intheir dan (or, occasionally in another clan) to learn a trade. Sincedwarves live so long, apprenticeships last for many years.Dwarves also consider political and military service a skilled trade,so soldiers and politicians are usually subjected to a long period ofapprenticeship before they arc considered professionals.To folk from other races, life within these cities might seem asrigid and unchanging as the stone that the dwarven houses arewrought from. In fact, it is. Above all. dwarves value law andorder. This love of stability probably comes from the dwarves 4long life spans, for dwarves can watch things made of wood andother mutable materials decay within a single lifetime. Itshouldn't be surprising, then, that they value things that are un¬changing and toil ceaselessly to make their crafts beautiful andlong-lived. For a dwarf, the earth is something to be loved be¬cause of its stability and the sea a thing to be despised—andfeared—because it is a symbol of change.Dwarves also prize wealth, as it is something that can be devel¬oped over a long period of time. All types ol precious metal, butparticularly gold, are highly prized by dwarves, as are diamondsand other gems. They do not value pearls, however, as they arereminders of the sea and all it stands for. Dwarves believe, how¬ever, that it is in poor taste to advertise wealth. Metals and gemsare best counted in secret, so that neighbors are not offended ortempted.Most other races see dwarves as a greedy, dour, grumpy folkwho prefer the dampness of a cave to the brightness of an openglade. This is partially true. Dwarves have little patience for menand other short-lived races (since man's concerns seem so pettywhen seen from dwarven eyes). Dwarves also mistrust elves be¬cause they are not as serious-minded as dwarves and waste theirlong lives on pastimes the dwarves see as frivolous. However,dwarves have been known to band together with both men andelves in times of crisis, and long-term trade agreements and alli¬ances are common.Dwarves have no mixed feelings about the evil races that dwellbelow ground and in the Underdark, however. They have an in¬tense hatred of ores, goblins, evil giants, and drow. The direcreatures of the Underdark often fear dwarves, too, for the short,stout folk are tireless enemies of evil and chaos* It is a goal of thedwarves to wage constant and bitter war against their enemiesunder the earth until either they or their foes are destroyed.Ecology: Since much of their culture is tocused on creatingthings from the earth, dwarves produce a large amount of useful,valuable trade material. Dwarves are skilled miners. Thoughthey rarely sell the precious metals and rough gems they uncover,dwarven miners have been known to sell surpluses to local hu¬man communities. Dwarves are also skilled engineers and masterbuilders—though they work almost exclusively with stone—andsome dwarven architects work for humans quite frequently.Dwarves most often trade in finished goods* Many dans arededicated to work as blacksmiths, silversmiths, goldsmiths, ar¬morers, weapons makers, and gem cutters. Dwarven productsare highly valued for their workmanship. In human communi¬ties, these goods often demand prices up to 20% higher than lo¬cally forged items. Many people are still whiling to pay a highprice for a suit of dwarven mail or a dwarven sword. Humansknow* that the dwarf who forget! the item made it to last a dwar¬ven lifetime, so they'll never need to worry about it wearing outin theirs.Similar in most ways to their cousins, the hill dwarves, thesedemihumans prefer to live deep inside mountains. They tend tobe slightly taller than hill dwarves (averaging 4 J /2 feet tall) andmore hearty (having 1 + 1 Hit Dice). They usually have slightlylighter skin and hair than their hill-dwelling relatives. In battle,mountain dwarf armies are likely to have more spears (30% max¬imum) and fewer crossbows (20% maximum) than hill dwarfarmies. Mountain dwarves have the same interests and biases ashill dwarves, though they are even more isolationist than theircousins and sometimes consider even hili dwarves to be outsid¬ers. Mountain dwarves live for at least 400 years.Derro are a degenerate race of dwarven stature. They have beenskulking in the Underdark for ages, but they were discovered bythe mind flayers only five centuries ago, and by the drow butshortly before that. The derro have made a name for themselvesby their marked cruelty It is said that a derro lives for just twothings: to witness the slow, humiliating death of surface demi-humans, and especially humans; and the perversion of knowl¬edge to their own dark ends.Derro are short, with skin the color of an iced over lake (white,with bluish undertones), sickly pale yellow or tan hair (alwaysstraight), and staring eyes that have no pupils. Their features re¬mind dwarves of humans, and vice versa. Derro have roughskin, spotted with short coarse tufts of hair. Most derro wear aloose costume woven from the hair of underground creatures anddyed deep red or brown. Their armor is leather, studded in cop¬per and brass Leaders wear tougher, kather armors, made fromthe hides of beasts far more rugged than cattle.Combat: Derro are one of the most dexterous of humanoid races(averaging 2548), and their Armor Class must be adjusted forthis. Normally a derro party ls well-equipped with weapons andspells. All derro carry small, ornamental blades, called secariwhich can be treated as daggers, but most use other weapons aswell.Half of all encountered derro carry a repeating light crossbow(.12 maximum range, two shots each round, six-bolt capacity ld3points of damage). Derro crossbowman usually coat their boltswith poison. If a derro wants to simply bring down his prey heuses a poison that causes an additional 2d6 points of damage(successful saving throw for no additional damage). If he desiresto prolong his targets suffering, he uses a poison that has thesame effects as a ray of enfeeblement spell (asuceessful savingthrow indicates no poison damage).Twentydive percent of derro carry a hook-fauchard. a long(6' + ) pole arm that causes ld4 points of impaling damage andcan pull a man-sized or smaller creature off-balance 25% of thetime. It takes one round to regain balance.Fifteen percent of derro use only a spiked buckler. This smallshield, improves the derro s AC by 1 against any one opponent.It is armed with a central spike, which can be wielded as a secondweapon (no penalty because of the derm's high Dexterity) for ld4points of impaling damage. The derro will also have a hookedaklys, a short, heavy dub that can be thrown for ld6 points ofcrushing damage. It is attached to a thick leather thong so that itcan be retrieved. Thanks to the hook, the aklys also pulls an op¬ponent off-balance but it has only a 1-8 chance. These derro areconsidered brave by their fellows; they are awarded the rarerheavier armors (AC 4),The remaining 10% of the derro are the sons and daughters ofderro leaders. They are given heavier armor and trained in theuse of the spear and the military pick. They use bucklers (sansspikes) when not using the spear with both hands.For every three derro encountered, there is one with 4 HitDice, For every six derro, there is one with 5 Hit Dice, If 10 ormore, there is a 7 Hit Die leader with a 6 Hit Die lieutenant. If aparty encounters 25 derro, they would be accompanied by eight4 Hit Die derm, four of 5 Hit Die, one with 6 Hit Dice, and onewith 7. The leaders always wear the thicker armor and usuallywield well-made {and occasionally magical) weapons.If 20 or more are encountered, they are accompanied by a sa¬vant and two students. Savant derro are able to use any sort ofmagical item or weapon. Savants know ld4 + 5 of the followingspells, learned at random: affect normal fires, anti-magic shell,blink , cloudkill BSP hypnotic pattern, ice storm, invisibility,levitate, light, lightning boh, minor creation l paralyzation, re¬pulsion. shadow magic, spider climb, ventriloquism , wall of fog,wall of force. Savants have 5-8 Hit Dice, and carry two or threeuseful magical items. Typical magical items are any potion, anyscroll, rings of fire resistance , invisibility, protection , and spellstoring , any wand, studded leather armor + 1, shields, weaponsup to +3, bracers of defense brooches of shielding > cloaks ofprotection, and so on. Savants can instinctively comprehend lan¬guages and read magic (as the spells).Savants are capable of acting as sages in one to three areas ofstudy. Derro raids are often inspired by a savant's research.Student savants know only 1-3 spells, have 4-7 Hit Dice, theyknow only one field of study, and one minor magical item.In combat, derro fight cunningiy, with good tactics. They keepspeikasters from effectively using magic, and inflict minorwounds until they eventually kill their opponents. Savants usetheir powers to confuse and frustrate, rather than to simply kill.Derro have poor infravision (3-foot range) but keen hearing(treat as the blind-fighting, non weapon proficiency).Derro keep slaves and attempt to capture intelligent oppo¬nents, when possible.Habitat Society: Derro live in large underground complexes,nearer the surface than the kuo-toans and drow, but deeper thangoblins and trolls. They never expose themselves to direct sun¬light; it nauseates them. Sunlight will kill a derro if he is exposedto it for several days. Still, derro do visit the surface at night,raiding for humans or carrying out a savant's plans,Derro are never encountered singly. From their combat tacticsto their choice of spells, derro demonstrate a mob mentality, Alone derro is a desperate derro, seeking at all costs to return to hishome.Derro lairs always have 3d4 +30 norma) derro, plus leaders.The members of the lair are led by the resident savants (1-3 innumber) and their apprentices (2-5 students!. Derro obey with¬out question the puzzling, even suicidal, dictates from their sa¬vant leaders.Also to be found in a derro lair are 5d6 + 10 human slaves. Ifany of the lair s savants or students know the charm person spell,each slave has a 90% chance of being charmed. Derro hate hu¬mans more than any other race; they use humans for the mostdemeaning manual labor, and for breeding,Derro do not appear to worship any powers, but the savantstreasure knowledge and the rest seem to worship the savants.Derro usually scour their territory for magical items, stealingthem, or. If necessary, purchasing them from more powerfulcreatures. Derro do not share the love of gold common to theirdwarven relatives, and they have been known to pay exorbitantprices for a few potions or for a magical item with a missing com¬mand word.Every 20 years or so. the derro mount an all-out war againstthe other creatures of the Underdark, This is known as the Unit¬ing War, and no savant really expects it to be won. The War is ameans of winnowing out the weakest of the derro lairs, a focalpoint for racial identity, and a chance to really create some terrorin the Underdark. It also serves the purpose of starting rumors.Humans will certainly hear that a war is being fought in theUnderdark, and they will send hundreds of scouting and adven¬turing parties to the underground to investigate. The derro wel¬come this new source of slaves.Ecology: Derro can live on a die! of underground fungi, but use Itonly for spice. They seek out other sustenance whenever possi¬ble. A derro hunting party usually pursues large, dangerous preythat will feed an entire lair, rather than smaller, simpler food. Thederro tendency to torment prey also holds when for huntingfood. They also raid other races tor food.Duergar, or gray dwarves, are a malevolent breed that exist atextreme depths underground, Duergar may be fighters, priests,thieves, or multi-classed fighter/priests, fighter, thieves, orpriest/thieves. Thieves are proficient in the use of poison.Duergar appear to be emaciated, nasty-looking dwarves.Their complexions and hair range from medium to dark gray.They prefer drab clothing designed to blend into their environ¬ment. In their lairs, they may wear jewelry, although such piecesare kept dull.Duergar have infravision to 120 feet. They speak the duergardialect of the dwarven tongue, "undercommon f ' (the trading lan¬guage of subterranean cultures), and the silent speech employedby some subterranean creatures. Intelligent duergar may speakother languages as well.Combat: For every four, single HD duergar encountered outsidea lair, there is one with 2 HD + 4 hp. If a band of nine are encoun¬tered outside a lair, there will be a tenth, with 3 HD + 6 hp or 4HD +6 hp always leads the group.1st level; pick, hammer, spear, chain mail, and shield;2nd level; pick, light crossbow, chain mail, and shield;3rd-blh level: hammer, short sword, plate mail and shield;?th-9th level: hammer*, short sword*, plate mail*, and shield*;3rd'bth/3rd-6th-Ievel priest/thief: any usable*/any usable*;7th-9th 7th-9th level priest/thief: any usable* / any usable*" 5% chance/level for magical item; for multi-class, add one-halfof lower level (round up) to the higher level in order to find theappropriate multiplier.There are non combatant, duergar children equal to 10% of thetotal number of duergar fighters encountered.The duergar s stealth imposes a —2 penalty to opponents' sur¬prise rolls; the duergar are surprised only on a 1 on IdlO. Theirsaving throws vs, magical attacks gain a +4 bonus. They are im¬mune to paralysis, illusions phantasm spells and poisons.All duergar possess innate magical abilities of enlargement andinvisibility* They can use these spells as wizards of a level equalto their hit points. Duergar can use enlargement to either grow orshrink themselves, as well as anything they are wearing or carry¬ing.Daylight affects the duergar as follows; their enhanced abilityto gain surprise is negated. Dexterity is reduced by 2, attacks aremade with a —2 penalty to the attack roll, and opponents" savingthrows are made with a +2 bonus. If the encounter occurs whenthe duergar are in darkness, but their opponents are brightly illu¬minated, the duergar's surprise ability and Dexterity are normal,but they still suffer a — 1 penalty to their attack rolls while theiropponents gain a +i bonus to saving throws against attacks,Duergar are not adversely affected by the light given off bytorches, lanterns, magical weapons, or light and faerie fire spells.There is a 10% chance that any duergar are accompanied by2d4 giant steeders, used as mounts (see Spiders).Habitat Society: Duergar society is similar to that of other dwar-ven cultures, although life is much harsher because of the hostileenvironment deep underground. They do not venture to the sur¬face except at night or on gloomy days. Duergar life spans canreach 400 years.Elemental* are sentient beings that can possess bodies made ofone of the four basic elements that make up the Prime Materialplane—air, earth, fire, or water. They normally reside on anelemental Inner Plane and will only be encountered on thePrime Material plane if they are summoned by magical means.(See Manual of the Planes for more information on the natureof 'he various elemental planes.) Each elemental must adopt ashell in the Prime Material composed of the basic element it rep¬resents. and once this shell is destroyed, the elemental will re¬turn to its native plane. While there are many more powerfuland more intelligent residents of the elemental planes, the com¬mon elemental is the easiest to contact, and therefore the mostfrequently summoned.Their magical nature gives elemental great protection from at¬tacks on the Prime Material plane. Elemental are not harmed byany non magi cal weapons or magical weapons of less than *2bonus. Creatures with under four Hit Dice and without any mag¬ical abilities cannot harm an elemental either. (Magical abilitiesinclude such characteristics as breath weapons, poisons, paraly¬sis, or even being immune to normal weapon attacks.} Ores, forexample, are powerless against a conjured elemental unless onehappens to possess a weapon with +2 or better bonus to hit.Though elemental do enjoy protection from many non-magical attacks in the Prime Material plane, like all extraplanarand conjured creatures, elementals are affected by protectionfrom evil spells. An elemental cannot strike a creature protectedby this spell and must recoil from the spells boundaries. How¬ever, the elemental can attack creatures protected by the spell aslong as it doesn't touch them. For example, a fire elemental couldset the ground on fire around the creature and wait for the blazeto spread.Each of the four types of common elemental has its own partic¬ular strengths and weaknesses, attack modes and method ofmovement, depending on its plane of origin. These will be cov¬ered individually, by elemental type, in the next few pages. AIJcommon elementals share one major characteristic, however.They are basically stupid. This low intelligence makes it difficultfor the elemental to resist a magical summons. But even the com¬mon elemental is bright enough to know it does not like beingtaken off of its home plane and held in the Prime Material plane.Summoning an Elemental: There are three basic ways to call anelemental to this plane, and the strength of the conjured elemen¬tal depends on the method used to summon it:Conjured by spell ____ 8, 12, 16, or 21-24 Hit DiceObviously the type of wizard or priest spell used to contact anelemental will greatly effect the size of the creature on this plane,(Sec Player's Handbook for specifics. 1 Also, a conjured efemervtal s height (in feet) is equal to its Hit Dice, so the method of sum¬moning an elemental to the Prime Material plane will alsodetermine its size.Each individual’* use of any spell, staff, or device in contactingthe elemental planes produces a unique call. This unique sum¬mons will only be answered by the inhabitants of a particularplane once per day. Therefore, each of the methods of summon¬ing elementals—spell, device, and staff—can be used by one per¬son to call only one of any specific type of common elemental perday. If a staff is used tour times in one day for example, all tourtypes of elementals must be called once.The only exception to this is a character using more than onemethod to call elementals Then, the conjurer can call a numberof elementals of the same type equal to the number of methodshe or she uses. This means a person with a device and a statf cansummon two earth elementals. However, a person with twostaffs can still summon only one elemental of any specific typein one day.Controlling an Elemental: Because the elemental will be furiousat being summoned to this plane, concentration in conjuring thecreature is vital. In calling an elemental, a person must remainperfectly still and focus all of his attention on controlling the be¬ing. Any distraction to the summoner, either mental or physical,will result in a failure to control the elemental when it arrives onthe Prime Material plane. Elementals that are uncontrolled andacting upon their own desires are called free-willed. If the party islucky, a free-willed elemental will immediately return to itsplane. However, this occurs only 25% of the time.In most cases (75% of the time), an uncontrolled elemental willimmediately attack the person or party who conjured it, also de¬stroying anything that stands between tt and its enemies. There isno way to gain control ot the elemental once it is lost, and there isnothing the objects of the elemental’s wrath can do but defendthemselves. The elemental s intense dislike of being away from itshome plane is the only safeguard those conjuring an elementalcan rely upon if the elemental runs wild. Because remaining onthe Prime Material plane is painful to any common elemental,the uncontrolled elemental will always return to its plane of orbgin three turns after control is lost, whether it has destroyed thecreatures responsible for calling it away from its elemental abodeor not.There is always a 5% chance per round that an elemental is inthe Prime Material (beginning with the second round! that thecreature will break control and attack the person who summonedit. Also, if a person is wounded, killed, or loses concentrationwhile controlling an elemental, the creature will become free-willed, The elemental will first attack the person who summonedit and then destroy any living thing it can find during the threeturns after control is lost. The creature will then return to itshome in the Inner Planes- A free-willed elemental can be sent toits home plane if a dismissal spell is cast upon it. but there is onlya 50% chance of success for the spell in this situation.A successfully controlled elemental will stay on the Prime Ma¬terial only for the duration of the spell that summoned it. and itcan be controlled from a distance up to 30 yards per level of theperson who summoned it- If under control, an elemental can bedismissed by the summoner when its task is complete,Stealing Control of an Elemental: Control of a conjured elemen¬tal can be stolen from the person who summoned it by castingdispel magic specifically at the magical control over the creature(not the elemental itself or the person controlling ith Most of thenormal rules for dispelling magic apply [Players Handbook p.148), However, when dealing with control over an elemental aroll of 20 by the person attempting the spell means that all con¬trol has been dispelled and the creature is now free-willed.If control of the elemental is stolen, the creature will follow thewishes of the new person controlling it as if he or she summonedit in the first place. It the dispef magic fails, the elemental willimmediately be strengthened to its maximum 8 hit points per dieand the conjurer's ability to control the elemental will be greatlyenhanced, making any new attempts to steal control of the crea¬ture impossible. Also, the elemental will recognize the personwho sought to take control of its will as a threat, if the personcurrently guiding the creature loses control, the elemental willimmediately attack the person who attempted to steal control otits will—even before attacking the person who first summoned it.
Air dementals can be conjured in any area of open air wheregusts of wind are present. The common air elemental appears asan amorphous, shifting cloud when it answers its summons to thePrime Material plane. They rarely speak, but their language canbe heard in the high-pitched shriek of a tornado or the low moanof a midnight storm.Combat: While air elemental* are not readily tangible to the in¬habitants of planes other than its own, they can strike an oppo¬nent with a strong, focused blast of air that, like a giant, invisiblefist, does 2-20 points of damage. The extremely rapid rate atwhich these creatures can move make them very useful on vastbattlefields or in extended aerial combat. In fact, the air elemen¬tal's mastery of its natural element gives it a strong advantage incombat above the ground. In aerial battles, they gain a +1 to hitand a +4 to the damage they inflict.The most feared power of an air elemental is its ability to forma whirlwind upon command . Using this form, the air elementalappears as a truncated, reversed cone with a 10 foot bottom di¬ameter and 30 foot top diameter. The height of the whirlwinddepends on the Hit Dice of the elemental. An air elemental of 8Hit Dice will produce a whirlwind standing 40 feet tall; a 12 HitDice elemental produces a whirlwind standing 60 feet tall: and a16 Hit Dice elemental produces a whirlwind standing 80 feet tall.It takes one full turn to form and dissipate this cone.This whirlwind lasts for one melee round, sweeps away andkills all creatures under 3 Hit Dice in the area of Us cone, anddoes 2-16 points of damage to all creatures it fails to kill outright.If, because of overhead obstructions, the whirlwind fails to reachits full height it can only sweep up creatures under 2 Hit Diceand do 1-8 points of damage to all others in its cone.Earth elemental* can be conjured in any area of earth or stone.This type of common elemental appears on the Prime Materialplane as a very large humanoid made of whatever types of dirt,stones, precious metals, and gems U was conjured from. It has acold, expressionless face, and its two eyes sparkle like brilliant,multifaceted gems. Though it has a mouth-like opening in itsface, an earth elemental will rarely speak. Their voices can beheard in the silence of deep tunnels, the rumblings of earth¬quakes, and the grinding of stone on stone.Though earth elemental* travel very slowly they are relentlessin the fulfillment of their appointed tasks. An earth elemental cantravel through solid ground or stone with no penalty to move¬ment or dexterity. However, these elemental* cannot travelthrough water: they must either go around the body of water Intheir path or go under it, traveling in the ground. Earth elemen¬tal prefer the latter as it keeps them moving, more or less, in astraight line toward their goal.Combat: Earth elemental* will always try to fight on theground and will only rarely be tricked into giving up that advan¬tage, Because of their dose alliance to the rock and earth, theseelemental* do 4-32 points of damage <4d8) whenever they strike acreature that rests on the ground.Against constructions with foundations in earth or stone,earth elemental* do great damage, making them extremely usefulfor armies sieging a fortification. For example, a reinforced door,which might require a few rounds to shatter using conventionalmethods, can be smashed with ease by an earth elemental. Theycan even level a small cottage in a few rounds.An earth elemental's effectiveness against creatures in the air orwater is limited; the damage done by the elemental's fists on air¬borne or waterborne targets is lessened by 2 points per die (to aminimum of 1 point of damage per die).Fire elemental can be conjured in any area containing a largeopen flame. To provide a fire elemental with an adequate shell ofPrime Material flame, a fire built to house an elemental shouldhave a diameter of at least six feet and reach a minimum of fourfeet into the airOn the Prime Material plane, a fire elemental appears as a tallsheet of flame. The fire elemental will always appear to have twoarmlike appendages, one on each side of its body- These armsseem to flicker back into the creatures flaming body only tospring out from hs sides seconds later. The only Facial features ofa fire elemental are two large glowing patches of brilliant bluefire, which seem to function as eyes for the elemental* Like allcommon elementals, fire elementals rarely speak on the PrimeMaterial plane, though their voices can be heard in the crackleand hiss of a large fire*Combat: Because they resent being conjured io this plane, fixeelementals are fierce opponents who will attack their enemies di¬rectly and savagely taking what joy they can in burning theweak creatures and objects of the Prime Material to ashes. Incombat, a fire elemental lashes out with one of its ever-movinglimbs, doing 5-24 points of damage. Any flammable objectstruck by the fire elemental must save versus magical fire at a -2or immediately begin to burn.Fire elementals do have some limitations on their actions in thePrime Material plane. They are unable to cross water or non¬flammable liquids. Often, a quick dive into a nearby lake orstream is the only thing that can save a powerful party from cer¬tain death from a fire elemental. Also, because their natural abili¬ties give them some built-in resistance to flame-based attacks,creatures with innate fire-using abilities, like red dragons, take lessdamage from a fire elemental's attack. The elemental subtracts tpoint from each die of damage it does to these creature (to a mini¬mum of 1 point of damage per die).Water elementals can be conjured in any area containing alarge amount of water or watery liquid. At least one thousandcubic feet of liquid is required to create a shell for the water ele¬mental to inhabit. Usually a large poo! serves this purpose, butseveral large kegs of wine or ale will do just as well*The water elemental appears on the Prime Material plane as ahigh-crested wave. The elementals arms appear as smallerwaves, one thrust out on each side of its main body. The armsebb and flow, growing longer or shorter as the elemental moves,Two orbs of deep green peer out of the front of the wave andserve the elemental as eyes. Like all other common elementals,water elemental rarely speak on the Prime Material plane, buttheir voices can be heard in the crashing of waves on rockyshores and the howl of an ocean gale.Combat: In combat, the water elemental is a dangerous adver¬sary* ll prefers to fight in a large body of water where it can con¬stantly disappear beneath the waves and suddenly swell upbehind its opponent. When the elemental strikes, it lashes outwith a huge wave-Uke arm, doing 5-30 points of damage.Water elementals are also a serious threat to ships that crosstheir paths. A water elemental can easily overturn small craft(one ton of ship per hit die of the elemental) and stop or slowalmost any vessel (one ton of ship per hit point of the elemental),Ships not completely stopped by an elemental will be slowed by apercentage equal to the ratio of ship's tons over the hit points ofthe attacking elemental.Though the water elemental is most effective in large areas ofopen water, it can be called upon to serve in a battle on dry land,close to the body of water from which it arose. However, themovement of the water elemental on land is the most restricted ofany elemental type: a water elemental cannot move more than 60yards away from the water it was conjured from* and 1 point ofdamage is subtracted from each die of damage they inflict out ofthe water (to a minimum of 1 point of damage per die).
Sylphs are beautiful, humanoid women with wings like dragon-flies. Their wings are 4-5 feet Jong and translucent, dear, or spot¬ted with iridescent color. Their long, bright, hair may be any"normal ' color, or blue, purple, or green. They wear flowing,diaphanous robes which accent their wings or hair.Sylphs are related to air elemental and to nymphs, perhapsoriginating as a cross-breed between nymphs and aerial servants.They speak Common and their own musical language. Sylphsare friendly and may (20%) befriend adventurers and give themaid in exchange for a favor.Combat; Sylphs defend themselves only with magical abilities, Asylph can cast spells as a 7th4evel wizard, and most prefer spellsof elemental air. In addition, the sylph can become invisible atwill and summon an air elemental once each week.Habitat-Society: Sylphs rarely touch ground in the lowlands.They are fond of travel, and it is rare to find one near its home.Sylph nests are highly individualistic, some formed fromwhatever materials are available, others are elaborate retreatsperched in tall trees or carved into mountains. Sylphs prefer sim¬ple and light possessions, keeping only gems and magical items astreasure. They often trade wealth for furnishings, such as lightdraperies, silks, and pillows,There is a 1% chance that a sylph's home holds an egg or achild. AH sylphs are female and mate with humanoid males, pre¬ferring elves, but sometimes accepting a human or halfling mate.Three months after conception, the sylph lays a pearly egg in aspecial nest, and summons an air elemental to guard tL Sixmonths later, the egg hatches a baby girl with wing buds. Thechild grows at the same rate as a human child, gaining magicalabilities at age five, and full flight by age 10.The sylph has the innate ability to levitate; wings are neededonly to provide thrust. If a sylph's wings are injured, it can onlyglide or hover. Anti-magical attacks may ground a sylph by ne¬gating its power of levitation. Sylphs live for up to 1,000 years,retaining their youthful looks throughout their lives.Every 28 years, ail sylphs gather in a grand meeting to trade,share news, renew- friendships, and welcome young sylphs.Ecology: Sylphs usually maintain their distance from the moremundane humanoid races, but associate freely with nymphs anddryads. Aerial monsters occasionally feed on them, but they arein greater danger from evil humanoid males who attempt to cap-tore them for dark purposes,This creature is a form of air elemental native to the plane of ele¬mental Air, as well as the Ethereal and Astral planes, and can besummoned to the Prime Materia) plane by clerics.Normally invisible, if seen on their home plane, they resemblelegless humanoids of sparkling blue smoke, with empty eyes, asiash for a mouth, and long, four-fingered hands,Aerial servants try to avoid combat on their native planes. Ithas a Strength of 23 and attacks by grabbing and strangling op¬ponents, causing damage with the hit, and in each round, untilthe victim breaks free. A character with exceptional Strength re¬ceives a percentage chance equal to the percentage of exceptionalStrength. Creatures with 18/00 Strength and above break freeeasily. Creatures with more hit points than the aerial servant canlikewise break its grasp. Aerial servants penalize opponents sur¬prise rolls by ”5 when invisible.A cleric who summons an aerial servant will be attacked unlessbehind a protection from evil, because the servants resent beingsummoned. Otherwise, the servant will complete any duty forthe cleric, except fighting, as fast as possible. If the servant is pre¬vented from completing its mission, it goes insane and returns tokill the summoning cleric.Aerial servants are wanderers drawn to areas of extremeweather. If caught in a storm, there is a 5% chance it will beMown in two; this is the only way it can reproduce.Aerial servants must feed on winds of their home planes atleast once per month, or suffer ld8 damage per day over 30 thatthey go without feeding.
SandlingTemperate ortropical, sandyor subterraneanRareThe pech are creatures of the plane of elemental Earth, thoughsome have extensive mines in the deepest regions of the PrimeMateria) plane. They dwell in dark places and work stone,Pech are thin and have long arms and legs. Their broad handsand feet are excellent for bracing and employing tools to workstone. They have pale, yellowish skin and red or reddish brownhair. Their flesh is nearly as hard as granite. Their eyes are largeand have no pupils. Tech have ixifravtsion to 110 feet.Combat: The pech use picks and peat hammers (treat as warhammers) for work and armament, and are usually equippedwith equal numbers of each. Pech have 18/50 Strength.Each pech can cast tour stone shape and four sfone tell spellsper day. Four pech can hand to together to cast a wall of stonespell as a 16th-level mage, Eight together can cast a stone to fleshspell. Group spells can be cast but once per day by any group.Pech are immune to petrification.When fighting Ethic monsters such as stone golems, gargoyles,or galeb duhr pech are quite capable of knocking them to rubble,as their knowledge of stone allows them full attack capabilityagainst such creatures, even with nonmagical weapons. Eachsuccessful strike does maximum damage.Ha bitabSociety: Pech are basically good and peaceful creaturesthat want to be left to themselves. They hate bright light andopen skies, and they are quick to ask others to douse lights. Theirlairs are constructed with numerous choke points so that walls ofstone can quickly stop intruders. Their lair holds 10-40 individ¬uals, with equal numbers of females and males, and young equalto 20-50% of the females.Ecology: The pech home plane is hostile, so many travel to thePrime Material plane to search for a better life. They have fewenemies there. Pech do not save large amounts of treasure; theymine for things to trade with others for food or services. They dosometimes create simple, unobtrusive ornamental objects foreveryday use, A pech lair may contain 50-100 trade gems plus 5-30 dishes and utensils worked from stone and raw metal. Theseitems are not very valuable, averaging 150 gp each.These creatures are composed of silicates and originated on theelemental plane of Earth, They look like piles of sand and canvary color to blend with backgrounds, handlings have the sametemperature as their surroundings, and are immune to sleep,charm, hold and other mind-affecting spells or attacks. Theyclaim territories with boundaries recognizable only by them.Sandlings are not aggressive unless provoked, but guard theirterritories from intruders. If stepped on 4 a sandling reflexivelylunges upward, trapping 1-2 man-sized opponents: opponents rea¬ctive a -2 penalty to surprise rolls when attacked in this manner.If the sandling hits its targets, they are unable to attack or defendfor ld4 rounds. Sandlings also attack by slashing with an abra¬sive pseudopod. If at least 10 gallons of water are poured on asandling, it is affected as if by a slow spell, and its attacks causeonly half normal damage.Sandlings have no society, and their fierce defense of their ter¬ritories usually precludes cooperation, even with other membersof their own race. They live on minerals, but despise organicmatter, always moving several hundred yards from any placethey have killed an intruder.A sandling grows until it reaches its full size, 10 feet in diame¬ter, then reproduces by budding. Sandling buds split from theirparent when they are about 2 inches long, and an adult's territorymay swarm with thousands of these creatures. When an Infantgrows to at least 6 inches in diameter, it either moves off to findits own territory, or is hunted and killed by the parent. A groupof immature sandlings forms a surface with myriad tiny bumps,which may trip the unwary,Sandlings have little effect on an ecosystem, taking only a frac¬tion of the minerals in any parcel of land. Dwarves sometimesseek them in hopes of finding a rich mineral deposit. They aresaid to be excellent ingredients for mortar, but they and manydruids object to this treatment.
Salamanders are natives of the elemental plane of Fire, and thusthey thrive in hot places. These cruel, evil creatures come to thePrime Material plane for reasons known only to them.The head and torso of a salamander is copper-colored and hasa human-like appearance. Most of the time (&0% L this aspect is amale, with flaming beard and moustache. The female version hasBowing, fiery red hair, Both aspects have glowing yellow eyesthat sometimes switch to fluorescent green, All aspects carry ashiny metal spear, resembling highly polished steel.The lower torso is that of a large snake, with orange coloringshading to dull red at the tail end. The entire body is coveredwith wispy appendages thal appear to burn hut are never con¬sumed.Combat: A salamander typically attacks with its metal spear,which inflicts ld6 points of damage plus a like amount for thespear's heat. At the same time, it can lash out and coil around anopponent with its snake-like tail, constricting for 2d6 points ofdamage, plus an additional Id6 points of damage from the heatol its body. While fire-resistant creatures do not suffer from thesalamander s heat damage, they are still subject to the spear andconstriction damage.Salamanders can be affected only by magical weaponry or bycreatures of a magical nature or those of 4 + 1 or more Hit Dice.They are impervious to all fire-based attacks. Sleep, charm , andhold spells are ineffective against them. Cold-based attacks causean additional 1 point of damage per die of damage. The head andupper body of the salamander has an AC of 5. while the lowerbody is AC 3.A favorite salamander tactic, if the creature is encountered in alava pit or roaring fire, is to grab its opponents and hurl theminto the Barnes, The victim would naturally take damage fromcontact with the salamander, then take even more from beingthrown inside a roaring conflagration.Habitat/Society: Salamanders are native to the elemental planeof Fire, They come to the Prime Material plane for reasonsknown only to them, though it is rumored that powerful wizardsand priests of certain religions can summon them for a shorttime. Salamanders hate cold, preferring temperatures of 300 de¬grees or more: they can abide lower temperatures for only a fewhours. Their lairs are typically at least 500 degrees. Any treasurefound there is the sort that can survive this heat, such as swords,armor, rods, other ferrous items, and jewels. Things of a com¬bustible nature, such as parchment and wood, soft metals such asgold and silver, and liquids, which quickly boil away, are neverfound in salamander lairs.Having a nasty disposition and an evil bent, salamanders re¬spect only power, either the ability to resist their fire or the capa¬bility to do great damage. Anyone else is dealt a painful, slow,burning death. It is rumored that they have some sort of dealingswith the efreeti.When encountered on the Prime plane, salamanders can befound playing in forest fires, lava flows, fire pits, and other areasof extreme heat. They usually appear on the Prime plane for apurpose, and if in the middle of a task they do not take kindly tobeing interrupted.Ecology: These fiery creatures' ichor is useful in the creation ofpotions of fire resistance, and the metal of their spears can beused to create rings of fire resistance ,Some sages say that fire snakes are larval salamanders. Firesnakes, colored in shades from blood-red to orange, are alwaysfound in fires. Some large permanent fires contain Id6 of thesecreatures, though in smaller, temporary fires like fire pits and oilbowls, there may be but one snake. The only treasure the snakeshave is the gems they often accumulate.Since their color matches their surroundings, they can surpriseopponents easily {-4 penally to opponents' surprise rolls). Theirbite inflicts ld4 points o! damage and injects a mild venom thatcauses paralyzation of the victim for 2d4 turns unless a savingthrow vs. poison is successful.
These creatures from the elemental plane of Water, sometimescalled "honeyed ones/' are unpredictable and playful; half arechaotic neutral, and others tend toward good or evil. Using dis¬guise, nereids lead sailors to their dooms,Nereids are transparent in water, 95% undetectable except asfroth and golden seaweed. Upon contact with air, they assumehuman form, usually as voluptuous young females with long,golden hair, pearly white skin, and sparkling green eyes. Theirvoices and songs are lovely, A nereid always carries a whiteshawl, either in its hands or over head and shoulders, and is light¬ly dad in white and gold. If confronted by only females, the ne¬reid appears in a male guise, but a woman has a 65% chance tosee through the disguise. All males who see a nereid are incapableof harming U (no saving throw).Combat: Nereids can spit venom 20 feet, blinding a target for 2d6rounds if it hits; the venom can be washed away with water. Ablinded victim s attack rolls, saving throws, and AC are all wors¬ened by 4 until the effects wear off.Nereids can control mater within 30 feet; it can use waves toslow movement to V* normal, increase chances of drowning by10% r or crash with a roar that deafens characters within 60 feetfor 3d4 rounds if precautions are not taken, Nereids can alsoform the water to look like a water weird, and cause it to strike asa 4 HD monster and inflict ld4 points of damage,A nereid is 85% likely to have a pet for protection, with equalchances for a giant eel, giant otter, giant poisonous snake, giantoctopus, giant squid, dolphin, giant leech, or sting ray*If the nereid makes a successful saving throw vs, poison, shecan (low like water, avoiding weapon damage or escaping a cap-tor, The neresd's kiss causes a man to drown, unless he makes asuccessful saving throw vs. breath weapon, with a -2 penalty. Ifhe lives, he finds ecstacy.The nereid protects its shawl at all costs, for it contains thenereid s essence; if it is destroyed, the nereid dissolves into form¬less water. Possession of a nereid's shawl gives a character con¬trol over the creature, which will accept commands to avoiddamage to the shawl. Stories tell ol forlorn nereids who followthe ships of a powerful foes who have stolen their shawls, A ne¬reid will lie and attempt anything short of violent action to regainits soul-shawl.Habitat/Sodety; A nereid found on the Prime Material plane haseither escaped or been exiled from its home plane. Though usu¬ally solitary, a small group of nereids with the same alignmentsometimes live together, led by the eldest.Polluted waters drain nereids J vigor, and even good nereidsmay attack those who pollute their lairs, Nereids do not valuemetals, but save any magical treasure they gain. The nereid hasno goals or ambitions other than cavorting in water.Ecology; Nereid shawls command handsome sums, but are sel¬dom sold and are very rare, One who holds a shawl can use theenslaved nereid as a guide on the plane of Water.These strange creatures from the plane of Water are hostile whenencountered on the Prime Material plane, as they are usuallymagically kept from going home* If communication is achieved,a bargain can sometimes be struck with the creature.Water weirds appear to be common water; a detect invisibilityreveals something amiss, but not the nature of the threat, When awater weird detects a living being, it assumes serpentine form(this takes two rounds). It attacks as a 6 HD creature; those hitmust make a successful saving throw vs* paralyzation, or bepulled into the water. Each round spent in the water requires an¬other saving throw; failure indicates death by drowning, whichreleases energy that the water weird consumes. A water weirdthat comes in contact with a normal water elemental has a 50%chance to usurp control of it.Water weirds take only I hp damage from piercing and slash¬ing weapons* The take half damage from fire, none if they makea successful saving throw. Intense cold acts as a skrm spell onwater weirds. If reduced to 0 hp or less, a water weird is disrupt¬ed, and it reforms in two rounds, A purify water spell will in¬stantly kill a single water weird.
The tempest is a living storm which appears as a dark stormcloud of comparatively small size. Human or bestial features canoften be seen in the roiling vapors of the tempest. Silver veinsextend across the creature and carry the electrical impulses thatmaintain the storm’s energy.Tempests have no language that humans may learn. They cancommunicate with air and water elementals and their kin, andgenies, through subtle wind buffets and spatterings of precipita¬tion. A few, perhaps 10%, have learned to speak a few words ofCommon, Their voices are very soft and sibilant, with a hint ofmalice behind the words.Combat: Tempests are territorial and consider any violation oftheir airspace to be a direct challenge. They feed on moisturefrom animals and often hunt in and around their territories. Theyhave a number of innate abilities which they can use to make lifemiserable for other creatures. Unless otherwise specified, all spe¬cial abilities are used as if the tempest were a 9th-level wizard. Atempest can make two attacks each round, one using its windpowers and one using its lightning power,Once per round, a tempest can use wind wall or gust of wind ,or may attack with a strong wind buffet for 2-16 points of dam¬age. Alternately, it may create a small whirlwind, which is coni¬cal in shape, 10 feet in diameter at the bottom, and 30 feet indiameter at the top, The whirlwind can be up to 50 feet high, andmust connect to the tempest's main body.The tempest takes one full round to create the whirlwind,which can cover an area of 100 square feet per round. Within thatarea, it automatically sweeps away and kills all creatures withless than 2 Hit Dice, and causes 2d6 points of damage to all crea¬tures which it fails to kill outright.Tempests may also use their powers over the air to penalizemissile attacks by - 6, or to batter down flying creatures, causingfalling damage to flying creatures that fail to make a successfulA tempest can also cast a lightning bolt once per round, at onevictim. The lightning bait causes one die of damage per Hit Die ofthe tempest. A victim of a lightning attack can make a savingthrow vs. spells; if successful, the victim takes only half damage.The tempest's Jjjgfcfrimg boh is like the 3rd-leve! wizard spell inother respects, having a length of SO feet, setting fire to combusti¬bles, melting metals, and shattering barriers. An exceptionallyhungry or perturbed tempest may use lightning to destroy an en¬tire building to reach the creatures inside.Tempests can also use a chilling wind to affect opponents,causing damage as a chill touch spell. Id4 points of damage andthe loss of 1 point of Strength, unless the victim makes a success¬ful saving throve vs, spells. This attack takes the place of either anelectrical attack or another wind attack.A tempest can produce up to 20 gallons of rain per round if itconcentrates and forgoes other attacks while raining. While pre¬cipitation is usually evenly distributed throughout its area, thetempest can concentrate the fall to fill a hole, wash out a bridge,or otherwise harm its victims.Tempests are immune to wind, gas. and water attacks, andtake only half damage from electrical or cold-based attacks.They are immune to all weapons of less than +2 enchantment.Habitat/Society: There is much speculation about the origin ofthese beings* who are apparently related to dementab and togenie-kind. Tempests are composed of all four basic elements,fire, earth, air* and water; fire in the form of lightning* earth intheir silver "circulatory system," air in their winds* and water inthe form of rain. They may be summoned accidentally when aspellcaster tries to summon an elemental, especially one of air orwater. At the DM's option, when a summoning is interfered with,the caster may be given a 10%-50% chance to summon a tem¬pest. These beings may also be attracted by a weather sum mov¬ing spell, with a 1% (non-cumulative) chance of appearing eachtime a spell is cast.
Some sages believe these creatures are jarm that have been in¬jured in some way and cannot retain human form. Whatevertheir origin, they do breed and reproduce as storms Though‘male and ‘female'’ do not truly describe the different types oftempests, there are two genders. When living storms of differentgenders meet, they have a brief, tempestuous affair, causing agreat conflagration that may last more than a week. Hurricanesor tornadoes are produced irregularly from the mass, to wreakhavoc upon the surrounding area.When the storm finally breaks, the two tempests leave the ar¬ea, and the residue they leave behind forms Ld4 infant tempests.These infant storms, sometimes referred to as tantrums, oftentravel together until they reach maturity, one year after birth.The young storms have 6 Hit Dice each, and can use only the gustof wind power, besides producing rain.Most tempests quite naturally seem to have very stormy dispo¬sitions. Their hunger for animal life goes beyond their need forthe moisture contained in animal bodies. Some sages speculatethat their physical form, or possibly some event in their history,causes them to hate animal life. It is quite possible that the electri¬cal impulses produced by animal brains cause pain to the tem¬pest.Tempests may be related to skriaxits, the living sandstorms ofsome worlds' deserts. No tempest has ever been known to en¬counter a skriaxit and their relationship and possible interac¬tions are completely unknown.Ecology: Tempests Feed on the moisture found in animal bodies.Though unable to cause harm to living creatures by drainingtheir moisture, they hover dose to the ground after a battle tosuck the water from dead opponents, as well as any water theymay have precipitated during the battle. They are sometimesfound scavenging after great battles between humans. By remov¬ing water from a corpse, they render it inviable to return to lifevia a raise dead spell, though resurrection and other spells worknormally.When a tempest is killed, a silver residue rains down from itsform. If carefully gathered, this residue provides a mass of silverequivalent to 3d6 silver pieces. Though valuable as a preciousmetal, the silver can also be used as a component in making awand of lightning or casting a weather-related spell. Bits of thesilver are also useful for making other weather or elemental re¬lated magical items.Genies and elemental are enemies of tempests; they often at¬tack them, and tempests respond in like manner, However, somegenies, especially djinn and marids, keep tempests as pets, train¬ing them as guards and to attack.Tempests can be quite devastating to a local ecology ifannoyed, and can cause great damage with wind, rain, and otherattack forms. Living storms are never found inside buildings orunderground.Skriaxits, also called blackstorms or living sandstorms, are themost feared creatures in many deserts. Spirits of retribution sum¬moned millennia ago by ancient gods, blaekstorms combine theelements of earth and air to dangerous effect. They are, fortu¬nately, only rarely active, They speak the tongue of air elemen-tals and their own language, a howling, shrieking tongue thatfrightens most humans who hear il.Much like very large versions of the dust devils created by thewizard s spell blaekstorms take the sand and the dust of the des¬ert and whirl it to create their 10-foot-tall conical forms. At rest,a skriaxit appears to be a wind-scattered pile of black dust* As apack, they create their greatest terror, generating high winds anda fierce sandstorm that can render a human fleshless in minutes.Combat: Skriaxits move by generating a large vortex of windthat propels them at high speeds. If there are 1-6 skriaxits togeth¬er, their speed is 12; 7-12 skriaxits have a speed of 18; if there are13 or more skriaxits, their speed is 24. The skriaxit vortex createsa sandstorm in a 200-yard radius around them; those caught inthis storm suffer 1 point of damage per round per skriaxit (so ifthere are 12 skriaxits in a pack, victims take 12 points of damageper round*Within this sandstorm, the skriaxit pack constantly dispelsmagic as a 16th~leve! wizard.Each skriaxit can form its winds into razor sharp lashes, inflict¬ing 2dl0 points of damage on a successful strike.Though they were originally summoned from the elementalplane of Air* they have merged with earthy and the Prime Materi¬al plane is now their home* Thus, they cannot be sent to an ele¬mental plane by a holy word or similar magic. No known magiccan control them, though they are susceptible to wards againstair dementals.Each skriaxit pack is led by a Great Skriax, the most evil mem¬ber of the pack. This creature has 24 +24 Hit Dice and gains a +4bonus to attack and damage rolls.Habitat Society; Skriaxits are highly intelligent, but extremelyevil, elemental, combinations of the elements of air and earth,They hate and fear nothing, but simply delight in destruction.They feed on terror and destruction; once they have causedenough catastrophe, they sleep For ld3 centuries* While asleep,they cannot be affected in any way by any being. They reawakenwhen hungry. They view humans, demihumans, and humanoidsas playthings, with the same sadistic attitude as a human childplaying with a fly* They may amuse themselves by listening tohumans bargain with them, but humans have nothing of interestto offer them*Ecology: Skriaxits teed upon the emotions of terror and fear theygenerate in those they destroy and kill.This is a variety of tempest found only in arctic regions and someof the colder temperate lands. While they are similar to tempestsin most respects, their special powers differ* They cannot use thewhirlwind or lightning bolt powers of the standard tempest. In¬stead, they can either cause snow to fall or cast ice storm spells.The arctic tempest usually uses a hail form of ke storm * but mayuse sleet instead, it can cause very cold snow to fall, inflicting9d4+9 points of cold damage to those beneath it. Victims whomake a successful saving throw vs* spells suffer only half damagefrom the attack.Like the standard tempest, the arctic variety can make only-two attacks per round, one using a wind power, such as gust ofwind or wind wall, and one using a cold-based power, such as icestorm or cause snow. It may also substitute an electrical attackfor either of its normal attacks, causing damage as a shockinggrasp spell for ld8 + 9 points of damage.This living storm* usually found in deserts, combines the ele¬ments of fire and air. It unleashes a fiery rain which causes 7dlDdamage to all beneath it* though a successful saving throw vs.breath weapon halves the damage, ft then fans the flames, andwill they continue to burn as long as there is fuel.Dawn dusk, early morn¬ing. and early eveningHerbivoreElephants have thick, baggy hides, covered with sparse and very coarsetufts of gray hair* The elephant's most renowned feature is iLs trunk,which it uses as a grasping limb,Combat: An elephant can make up to five attacks at one time in a bat-tie. It can do stabbing damage of 2-16 points (2dS) with each of Us twotusks: constricting damage of 2-12 points with its trunk; and 2-12 pointsof trampling damage with each of its from feet. No single opponent canbe subject to more than two of these attacks at any one time* However,the elephant can battle up to six man-sized opponents at one time.Creatures larger than ogre-sized are not subject to the elephants trunkattack. Also an elephant will never attempt to grasp anything that mightharm Us trunk—like an object covered with sharp spikes. Elephantsgreatly fear fire.Habitat.Society: Elephants are peaceful herbivores that travel in a herd.The herd is made up o! both male and female elephants, as well as theiryoung. If a herd of 10 or more elephants is encountered, there will be 1-4young, from 20% to 70% mature, with the group. In the herd, a dearhierarchy exists, with the older males in a dear position of dominance.Occasionally, an older male elephant will be beaten by a rival in theherd. The defeated elephant must then leave the group, at which point itbecomes a violent rogue.' Rogue elephants encountered alone are 90%likely to attack, and will have no fewer than 6 hit points per hit die.Ecology: Elephants are commonly captured when young and trained.They make good beasts of burden, but are often used in warfare asmounts and living battering rams, as well.Elephant tusks are worth 100 to 600 hundred gold pieces each, or about4 gp per pound. In areas heavily populated by elephants, a substantialtrade in this ivory will be common.Mammoths: This ancestor of the elephant was common during thePleistocene era. Mammoths are covered with thicker, woolier hair thanthe modern elephant, and they are considerably larger. Mammoths aremuch more aggressive than elephants and will attack with less provoca¬tion. Because they are heavier, a mammoth's tusks are worth 50% morethan an elephants. Mammoths are rare when encountered outside of aPleistocene campaign, and will only be found in subarctic plains.Mastodons: Like the mammoth, the mastodon is an ancestor of the ele¬phant that was common in the Pleistocene era, when they roamed fromsubarctic to tropical plains* They are larger than the modem elephant,hairier, and somewhat greater in length. Encountered outside of a Pleisto¬cene campaign, mastodons are rare, and found only in subarctic plains.Oliphants; The oliphant is a modern-day mastadon. with shaggy hairand tusks that curve down. The oliphants trunk is too short to be used incombat. This limits the number of man-sized opponents an oliphant canattack at one time to four, Oliphants are more intelligent than elephantsand do not share its cousins 1 unreasoning tear of fire. They are also veryaggressive, and when properly trained and fed, oliphants grow to greaterbulk (10+5 Hit Dice) than their wild counterparts. These trained oli¬phants are excellent for combat duty and have a morale of 10. An oli-phant’s tusks are worth 100 to 400 gold pieces each, or about 4 gp perpound, bul are smaller than an elephant s.
°0% resistance to sleep and allcharm-related spellsM (5' + tall)Though their lives span several human generations, elves appearat first glance to be frail when compared to man. However, elveshave a number of special talents that more than make up for theirslightly weaker constitutions.High elves, the most common type of elf, are somewhat short¬er than men, never growing much over than 5 feet tall. Male elvesusually weigh between 90 and 120 pounds, and females weighbetween 70 and 100 pounds. Most high elves are dark-haired,and their eyes are a beautiful, deep shade of green. They possesinfra vision up to 60 feet. The features of an ell are delicate andfinely chiseled.Elves have very pale completions, which is odd because theyspend a great deal of time outdoors. They tend to be slim, almostfragile. Their pale complexion and slight builds are the result of aconstitution that is weaker than mans. Elves, therefore, alwayssubtract 1 point from their initial Constitution score. Thoughthey are not as sturdy as humans, elves are much more agile, andalways add 1 point to their initial Dexterity scores. Elven cloth¬ing Lends to be colorful, but not garish. They often wear pastelcolors, especially blues and greens. Because they dwell in forests,however, high elves often wear greenish grey cloaks to affordthem quick camouflage.Elves have learned that it is very important to understand thecreatures, both good and evil, that share their forest home. Be¬cause of this, elves may speak the tongues of goblins, ores, hob¬goblins. gnolis, gnomes, and half lings, in addition to commonand their own highly-developed language. They will alwaysshow an interest in anything that will allow them to communi¬cate with, and learn from, their neighbors.Combat: Elves are cautious fighters and always use theirstrengths to advantage if possible. One of their greatest strengthsis the ability to pass through natural surroundings, woods, orforests, silently and almost invisibly. By moving quietly andblending into vegetation for cover, elves will often surprise a per¬son or party (opponents have a surprise modifier of -4). As longas they are not attacking, the elves hiding in the forest can onlybe spotted by someone or something with the ability to see invisi¬ble objects. The military value of this skill ls immense, and elvenarmies will always send scouts to spy on the enemy, since suchspies are rarely caught-or even seen.Although their constitutions are weak, elves posses an ex¬tremely strong will, such strong wills, in fact, that they have a90% immunity to all charm and sleep spells . And even if theirnatural resistance to these spells fails, they get a norma! savingthrow'-making it unlikely an elf will fall victim to these spellsvery often.Elves live in the wild, so weapons are used for everything fromdealing with the hostile creatures around their camps, to suchmundane tasks as hunting for dinner. The elves' rigorous trainingwith bows and swords, in addition to their great dexterity, givesthem a natural bonus of +1 to hit when fighting with a short orlong sword, or when using a bow of any kind, other than a cross¬bow. Elves are especially proficient in the use of the bow. Be¬cause of their agility, elves can move, fire a bow, and moveagain, all in the same round. Their archers are extremely mobile,and therefore dangerous.Because of limitations of horses in forest combat, elves do notusually ride. Elves prefer to fight as foot soldiers and are gener¬ally armed as such. Most elves wear scale, ring, or chain mail,and almost all high elves carry shields. Although elves have natu¬ral bonuses when they use bows and swords, their bands carry avariety of weapons. The weapons composition of a band of elvesis: spear 30%; sword 20%; sword and spear 20%; sword andbow 10%; bow 15%; two-handed sword 5%,Elven fighters and multi-class fighters have a 10% chance perlevel to possess a magical item of use to his or her class, Thispercentage is cumulative and can be applied to each major typeof magical item that character would use-far each class in thecase of multi-class characters. (For example, a fighter/priest oflevel 4 or 5 would have a 40% chance to have a magical itemuseful to fighters and a 50% chance of having an item useful topriests.) In addition, if above 4th level, elven mages gain thesame percentage chance to gain items, but gain 2-5 magical itemsuseful fro them if a successful roll is made.For every 20 elves in a group, there will be one 2nd- or 3rd-level fighter (50% chance oi either). For every party of 40 elves,and in addition to the higher level fighter, there will be a 1st- or2nd-level mage (again, 50% chance of either). If 100 or moreelves are encountered, the following additional characters will bepresent: two 4th-level tighter: one 8th-)evel mage; and a 4th-levelfighter/4th-level mage'4th-level thief. Finally, if over 160 elvesare encountered, they will be led by Iwo 6th-level fighter/6th-level mage/6th-level thief . These two extremely powerful leaderswill have two retainers each-a 4th-Ievel fighter/Sth-level mage,and a 3rd-level fighter 3rd-level mage/3rd-leve! thief. All ofthese are in addition to the total number of elves in the band.Elven women are the equal of their male counterparts in allaspects of warfare. In fact, some bands of elves will contain unitsof female fighters, who will be mounted on unicorns. This occursrarely (5% chance), and only 10-30 elf maidens will be encoun¬tered in such a unit. However, the legends of the destructionwrought by these elven women are rampant among the enemiesof the elves.Habitat-Society: Elves value their individual freedom highly andtheir social structure is based on independent bands. These smallgroups, usually consisting of no more than 200, recognize the au¬thority of a royal overlord, who in turn owes allegiance to a kingor queen. However, the laws and restraints set upon elven societyare very few compared to human society and practically negligi¬ble when compared to dwarven society.Elven camps are always well-hidden and protected. In additionto the large number of observation posts and personnel traps setaround a camp, high elves typically set 2-12 giant eagles asguardians of their encampments (65% of the time). For every 40elves encountered in a camp, there will be the following highlevel elves, as well as the leaders noted above: a 4th-level fighter,a 4th-level cleric, and a 2nd-level fighter/2nd-Ievel mage/2nd-level thief. A 4th-level fighter/7th-level mage, a 5th-level fighter,a 6th-level fighter, and a 7th-level cleric will also be present. Fe¬males found in a camp will equal 100%, children 50%, of themales encountered.Because elves live for several hundred years, their view of theworld is radically different from most other sentient beings. Elvesdo not place much importance on short-term gains nor do theyhurry to finish projects. Humans see this attitude as frivolous;the elves simply find it hard to understand why everyone else isalways in such a rush.Elves prefer to surround themsel ves with things that will bringthem joy over long periods of time^lhings like music and nature.The company of their own kind is also very important to elves,since they find it hard to share their experiences or their perspec¬tives on the world with other races. This is one of the main rea¬sons elven families are so close. However, as friendship, too issomething to be valued, even friends of other races remainfriends forever.Though they are immune to a few specific Spells, elves are cap¬tivated by magic. Mot specif ic spells, of course, but the very con¬cept of magic. Cooperation is far more likely to be had from anelf , by offering an obscure, even worthless, (but interesting) mag¬ical item, than it is with two sacks of gold. Ultimately, their radi¬cally different perspective separates the elves from the rest oftheir world. Elves find dw-arves too dour and their adherence tostrict codes of law unpleasant. However, elves do recognizedwarven craftsmanship as something to be praised. Elves think abit more highly of humans, though they see man's race afterwealth and fleeting power as sad. In the end, after a few hundredyears, aH elves leave the world they share with dwarves and men,and journey to a mysterious land where they live freely for therest of their extremely long lives.Ecology: Elves produce fine clothes, beautiful music, and bril¬liant poetry. It is for these things that other cultures know thefolk of the forest best. In their world within the forest, however,elves hold in check the dark forces of evil, and the creatures thatwould plunder the forest and then move on to plunder another.For this reason alone, elves are irreplaceable.Grey elves have either silver hair and amber eyes, or pale goldenhair and violet eyes (the violet-eyed ones are known as faerieelves). They favor bright garments of white, gold, silver, or yel¬low, and wear cloaks of deep blue or purple. Grey elves are therarest of elves, and they have little to do with the world outsidetheir forests. They value intelligence very highly, and, unlike oth¬er elves, devote much time to study and contemplation. Theirtreatises on nature are astounding.Grey elves value their independence from what they see as thecorrupting influence of the outside world, and will fight fiercelyto maintain their isolation. All grey elves carry swords, and mostwear chain mail and carry shields. For mounts, grey elves willride hippogriffs (70%) or griffons (30%) Those that ride griffonswill have 3-12 griffons for guards in their camps, instead of gianteagles.Also called sylvan elves, wood elves are the wild branch of the elffamily. They are slightly darker in complexion than high elves,their hair ranges in color from yellow to coppery-red. and theireyes are light brown, light green, or hazel. They wear clothes ofdark browns and greens, tans and russets, to blend in with theirsurroundings. Wood elves are very independent and valuestrength over intelligence. They will avoid contact with strangers75% of the time.In battle, wood elves wear studded leather or ring mail and50% of their band will be equipped with bows. Only 20% ofwood elves carry swwds. and only 40% use spears. Wood elvesprefer to ambush their enemies, using their ability to hide in theforest until their foes are dose a! hand. In most cases (70%),wood elf camps are guarded by 2-8 giant owls (80% ) or by 1-6giant lynx (20%). These elves speak only elf and the languages ofsome forest animals, and the treant. Wood elves are more in¬clined toward neutrality than good, and are not above killingpeople who stumble across their camps. In order to keep theirlocations secret.Half-elves are of human stock, and have features of both the elfand human parents. They are slightly taller than common elvesgrowing as tall as 5 Vz feet and weighing up to 150 pounds.Though they do not gain the natural sword or bow bonuses fromtheir elven relatives, but they do have normal elven infravision.A half-elf can travel freely between most elven and humansettlements, though occasionally prejudice will be a problem.The half-clfs life span is their biggest source of grief, however.Since a half-elf lives more than 125 years, he or she will outliveany human friends or relatives, but grow old too quickly to be areal part of elven society, Many half-elves deal with this by trav¬eling frequently between the two societies, enjoying life as itcomes; the best of both worlds. Half-elves may speak common,elf, gnome, halfling, goblin, hobgoblin, ore, and gnolh
Beneath the crashing waves of wild coastlines lives the sea-elf,aquatic cousin of the woodland elves in conduct and outlook.Aquatic elves live for many centuries, and their eyes oftenshow the effects of such great age. Otherwise, sea elves show lit¬tle evidence of aging. They have gill slits on either side of theirthroats, and greenish-silver skin. Their hair Is usually stringy,and emerald green to deep blue in color. Males usually wear theirhair short , but females allow their hair to reach as much as 4 feetin length. Unlike mermen, aquatic elves have kgs and usuallywear clothes woven from underwater plants and reeds. Theirdress is quite intricate, most often of greens, blacks, and brownswoven in subtle, swirling designs. Sea elves speak elvish, sa-huagin, and an oddly accented common.Combat: Sea elves are a peaceful culture. It is a rare sight to seean aquatic eh launch an attack, and rarer still for an entire bandto prepare for war, Sea elves will leave their homes to go to battleonly when the entire community is in danger, or against greatenemies. When forced to war, they impress all opponents withtheir fierce bravery and skill.If given their choice of battlefield, aquatic elves would preferto fight in a bed of seaweed, or on the reefs, where their naturalcoloration and stealth skills can give them the chance to hidefrom their enemies. They can become as invisible in seaweed astheir woodland cousins can in the forests, imposing a - 5 penaltyto their opponent's surprise roll. Sea elves enjoy the ability tomove unhindered through seaweed, giving them tremendous ad¬vantages m maneuverability. While they lack the infravision oftheir land-based cousins, they can see dearly at amazing dis¬tances, An aquatic elf can count the troops of an enemy at dis¬tances of up to 1 mile.Their preferred weapons are the trident and the spear. Theseare used for hunting as well as for combat. The trident and spearare wielded so well by sea elves, that they receive a + I bonus totheir attack roll w hen using them. They will also use combat netsagainst their enemies. These off-hand weapons will bind an op¬ponent if the wieider rolls a successful attack against AC 6, (Be¬cause of their great Dexterity aquatic elves do not suffer apenalty to the attack roll for the nets.) Half the time, only a vic¬tims weapon (including natural weapons, like a sharks teeth)will be entangled in the net. The rest of the time, the victim istrapped. A netted victim must either break the net (a bend barsroll) or disentangle himself (a Dexterity check with at a -3 pen¬alty) to get free. Magical gestures are impossible in a net.On some worlds, sea elves are unable to cast spells. The rea¬sons for this are unknown, but there is a legend among these nem-magical sea elves that the drow stole this ability from them, longages ago.Like their surface counterparts, aquatic elves demonstratestrong resistance to sleep and charm spells. Aquatic elves alsohave a 90% immunity against charm person spells. And even iftheir natural resistance to sleep and charm spells fails, aquaticelves still get a normal saving throw.In combat, leadership is divided according to the size of Lhewar party For every 20 elves in a band, there is an additional3rd-kvel fighter. For every 40 elves, there is an additional 4th-level fighter. In a force numbering over 100, there will be an 8th-level fighter and tw*o 5th-level lieutenants (in addition to the 3rd-and 4tb-Ievel fighters above), A combat unit of more than 160elves are accompanied by a 9th-level fighter and a 6th-kve! thief ,in addition to their original numbers.Sea elves befriend dolphins and employ them as companionsand comrades-in-arms. In any party of at least 20 sea elves,there's a 50% chance for them to be accompanied by ld3 dol¬phins. The dolphins are companions, however, they are neitherpets nor cannon fodder. When danger threatens, dolphins jointhe combat as willing allies.Battle tactics of the sea elves differ from one band to another,but common strategies include the following:A charge from directly beneath an opponent. This is particularlyeffective against unwanted visitors from the surface, who are un¬accustomed to being attacked from below. If the elf launched thisattack from a bed of seaweed, he might well escape back to coverbefore his opponents could react,A beaching, usually by more than one elf. Sea elves can sur¬vive on land for a few minutes at a time, though in a state ofgrowing discomfort. Many of their opponents, like sharks, can¬not, Several elves may attempt to wrestle an opponent to thebeach, taking it well away from the ocean.Traps, Beds of seaweed and coral reefs are excellent staging ar¬eas for all manner of spring-loaded booby-traps, nets, and per¬haps magical entrapments designed and built by surface elves inreturn tor favors. Predators have often decided to turn towardeasier prey after encountering a sea elf band's defenses.Habitat Society: Small communities of 3dIQ0 + JOO normal in¬habitants are the rule of aquatic elven lifestyle. These communi¬ties are often found in heavy weed beds in sheltered waters,though the aquatic elves may fashion homes in caverns in lagoonbottoms and coral reefs. Sea elf communities keep in touch witheach other through an elaborate and inefficient custom of wan¬dering herald messengers who travel from one band to anothermuch like postal carriers transmitting oral messages. In eachcommunity, there are several leader-types, as outlined earlier,ruled over by a fighter of 10th-12th level, with a personal guardof eight ?th-level elf fighters. Magical weapons would be cardedby the leader or one of his guards.Aquatic elves are an anti-social race. They avoid air-breathersas well as other races that dwell beneath the waves. Their citiesare usually carved from the rock beneath beds of seaweeds, prac¬tically invisible to non-elves, A character has the same opportu¬nity to find a sea elf community as he has to detect a secret door.As independent as the freedom-loving elves are of each others'communities, they live in even greater isolation from the rest ofthe undersea races, whom they would rather not deal with. Al¬though the aquatic elves see nothing wrong with the mermen, thetritons, and other good-aligned undersea races, the elves see noreason to involve themselves in the problems of such transitorypeoples. It is part of the elven philosophy to let others go abouttheir business with a minimum of interruption; aquatic elveswould prefer it if others returned the favor.Those aquatic elves who are willing to deal with non-elves arehighly insulted if the non-elves expresses any lack of confidencein the sea elf's word. An aquatic elf who makes a promise willcarry out his obligation unto death, Should he be killed before hecan succeed, his entire band will work to see that the promise isfulfilled. On the other hand, aquatic elves do not accept promisesfrom non-elven characters. The sea elves know that they are theonly race with the honor to carry out the duties of its dead mem¬bers, And, besides, only elves live long enough to guarantee thatthey will have the time to fulfill a vow.Dolphins are one of the tew creatures the sea elves genuinelytike. There are 3do +2 dolphins swimming about most aquatic elfbands, providing one of the few' clues as to where the elven citiesare located. Aquatic elves are also fairly fond of land elves. It isuncertain how closely related the two races are, although mat¬ings between land elves and aquatic elves produce elves with thecoloring of high elves, but with greenish hair. As they have hid¬den gill slits that open up when they dive under the surface, theseelves can breathe either air or water indefinitely The attitudesand abilities of these half-breeds depend upon whether they werereared in the forests or the rich kelp beds, with individuals in¬clined (65%) to follow the lifestyles of their mothers.Sea elves have an outlook on the world that comes from longlives among quiet natural beauty. Even with magical assistance toenable them to breathe air, aquatic elves are uncomfortableabove the waves, and so very few have seen the forests that thehigh elves speak of with such enthusiasm. But there are fewaquatic elves who w ould not like to take the impossible trip over¬land to see the wonders of a forest first-hand.Sea elves hate sahuagin. This isn't much of a surprise, as al¬most every undersea race, with the exception of the perverse ix-itachitls. hates the sea-devils. But sea elves generate a passion forconflict with the sahuagin that surprises even themselves. Aquat¬ic elves leave their sheltered bands in war parties if they havereason to suspect that sahuagin are dwelling nearby. Should aparty of sea elves encounter sahuagin. the former nearly alwaysattack if they outnumber their hated foes. Aquatic elves alsomake it a point to kill any great sharks in their territory.Sea elves have no other major enemies, but they dislikesurf ace-dwelling fishermen, due to the numbers of sea elvessnared in nets, or mistakenly killed as sahuagin by these ignoranthumans.The sea elves have legends that speak of far-away underseaelves who have learned to shapechange into sea otters or dol¬phins. There have been search parties motivated by these tales,but no such elves have ever been found.Ecology: Each band of sea elves is self-sufficient, raising theirkelp and hunting fish when necessary.Sea elves scavenge. They are enchanted by the idea of magic,but they realize that land elves are more equipped to deal with it.They often trade rare or decorative items they have found to thehigh elves in exchange for metal weapons and took, which theycannot forge underwater.Aquatic elves are valuable sources of information regardingthe lands beneath the sea. Their scavenging parties have uncover¬ed artifacts and tidbits of knowledge from a vast collection ofunderwater ruins and sunken ships. Sea elf traders remember thehistories of other races back beyond the imaginings of the currentgeneration. The trick is to gel them to reveal this information.There is a bond between aquatic elves and their hated enemies,the sahuagin, that neither race openly acknowledges. If sea elvesare present within a mile or so of a sahuagin encampment, thenapproximately one out of every 1 hundred sahuagin births resem¬bles an aquatic elf rather than a sea-devil, Most of the time, theseoffspring, known as malenti, are eaten by their parents. Once ina great while, a malenti is allowed to live to adulthood because itsphysical resemblance to an aquatic elf, in combination with itssahuagin upbringing and attitude, make it an ideal spy in elvencommunities. Indeed, malenti often develop the ability to sensethe presence and position of any aquatic elves within 120 feet, aninvaluable skill for either a spy or a scout for an invading sa¬huagin force.Few aquatic elves believe in the existence of malenti. as theysuggest some disturbing possibilities about sahuagin origins.Malenti do exist, however, and are identical to aquatic elves inmost ways. They age much faster, though, with a life span ofonly 170 years or so. Although the sea elves themselves have adifficult time discerning malenti spies, dolphins might (20%)sense one of the changelings, malenti understandably aren'tfond of dolphins.It is possible tor sahuagin and malenti to breed, the issue in¬variably being malenti. In this way whole sahuagin communitieshave vanished, replaced by malenti. These extraordinarily rarebands resemble aquatic elves in nearly every way (except lifespan, known languages and other obvious aspects), but they arejust as evil as their sahuagin parents. They often fight in thatstyle, and they worship the same evil powers as the sahuagin.These dreaded, evil creatures were once part of the community ofelves that still roam the world s forests. Now these dark elves in¬habit black caves and winding tunnels under the earth, wherethey make dire plans against the races that still walk beneath thesun, on the surface of the green earth.Drow have black skin and pale, usually white hair. They areshorter and more slender than humans, seldom reaching morethan 5 feet in height. Male drow weigh between 80 and 110pounds, and females between 95 and 120 pounds. Drow havefinely chiseled features, and their fingers and toes are long anddelicate. Like all elves, they have higher Dexterity and lowerConstitution than men.Drow clothing is usually black, functional, and often possessesspecial properties, although it does not radiate magic. For exam¬ple. drow cloaks and boots act as if they are cloaks of and bootsof ehenkmd, except that the wearer is only 75% likely to remainundetected in shadow's or to surprise enemies. The material usedto make drow cloaks does not cut easily and is fire resistant, giv¬ing the cloaks a+ 6 bonus to saving throws vs, fire. These cloaksand boots fit and function only for those of clven size and build.Any attempt to alter a drow cloak has a 75% chance of unravel¬ing the material, making it useless.In the centuries they've spent underground, drow have learnedthe languages of many of the intelligent creatures of the under¬world. Besides their own tongue, an exotic variant of elvish,drow speak both common and the subterranean trade languageused by many races under the earth. They speak the languages ofgnomes and other elves fluentlyDrow also have their own silent language composed of bothsigned hand movements and body language. These signs can con*vey information, but not subtle meaning or emotional content. Ifwithin 30 feet of another drow, they can also use complex facialexpressions, body movements, and postures to convey meaning.Coupled with their hand signs, these expressions and gesturesgive the drows silent language a potential for expression equal tomost spoken languages,Combat: The drow's world is one in which violent conflict is partof everyday life. It should not be surprising then, that most drowencountered, whether alone or in a group, are ready to fight,Drow encountered outside of a drow city are at least 2nd-levellighters. {See Society note below.)Drow wear finely crafted, non-encumbering, black mesh ar¬mor. This extremely strong mail is made with a special alloy ofsteel containing adamantite. The special alloy when worked by adrow armorer, yields mail that has the same properties of chainmail + J to + S, although it does not radiate magic. Even the low¬liest drow fighters have, in effect, chain mail +I r while higherlevel drow have more finely crafted, more powerful, mail. (Thearmor usually has a + 1 for every four levels of experience of thedrow wearing It.)Dark elves also carry small shields [bucklers) fashioned of ada¬mantite. Like drow armor, these special shields may be + 1, +2,or even+3, though only the most important drow fightershave+3 bucklers.Most drow carry a long dagger and a short sword of adamanti¬te alloy. These daggers and swords can have a + 1 to + 3 bonus,and drow nobles may have daggers and swords of +4 bonus.Some drow (50%) also carry small crossbows that can be held inone hand and will shoot darts up to 60 yards. The darts onlyinflict 1-3 points of damage, but dark elves commonly coat themwith poison that renders a victim unconscious, unless he rolls asuccessful saving throw- vs. poison, with a -4 penalty. The ef¬fects last 2d4 hours.A few drow carry adamantite maces (+ 1 to + 5 bonus) insteadof blades. Others carry small javelins coated with the same poi¬son as the darts. They have a range of 90 yards with a short rangebonus of + 3, a +2 at medium, and a +1 at long.Drow move silently and have superior infravision (120 feet),They also have the same intuitive sense about their undergroundworld as dwarves do, and can detect secret doors with the samechance of success as other elves. A dark elf can only be surprisedby an opponent on a roll of 1 on IdlO.
All dark, elves receive training in magic, and are able to use theto I lowing spells once per day: dancing lights, faerie fire. anddarkness. Drow above 4th level can use levitate, iotoio align¬ment, and detect magic once per day. Drow priests can also usedetect lie, clairvoyance suggestion, and dispel magic once perday.Perhaps it is the common use of magic in drow society that hasgiven the dark elves their incredible resistance. Drow have a baseresistance to magic of 50 %. which increases by 2% for each levelof experience, (Multi-classed drow gain the bonus from only theclass in which they have the highest level.) All dark elves save vs.all forms of magical attack (including devices) with a +2 bonus.Thus, a 5th-Jcvel drow* has a 60% base magic resistance and a +2bonus to her saving throws vs. spells that get past her magic re¬sistance.Drow encountered in a group always have a leader of a higherlevel than the rest of the party. If 10 or more drow are encoun¬tered, a fighter/mage of at least 3rd level in each class is leadingthem. If 20 drow are encountered, then, in addition to the higherlevel fighter/mage, there is a fighter /priest of at least the 6th levelin both classes. If there are more than 30, up to 50% are priestsand the leader is at least a 7th-level fighter/&fch-level priest, witha Sth-level fighter/4th-level mage for an assistant, in addition tothe other high level leaders.Dark elves do have one great weakness + bright light. Becausethe drow have lived so long in the earth, rarely venturing to thesurface, they are no longer able to tolerate bright light of anykind, Drow within the radius of a light or continual light spell are90% likely to be seen. In addition, they lose 2 points from theirDexterity and attack with a -2 penalty inside the area of thesespells. Characters subject to spells cast by drow affected by afight or continual light spell add a +2 bonus to their savingthrows. If drow are attacking a target that is in the area of effectof a light or continual light spell, they suffer an additional -1penalty to their attack rolls, and targets of drow magical attackssave at an additional + 1. These penalties are cumulative (i.e., ifboth the drow and their targets are in the area of effect of a hghfspell, the drow suffer a -3 penalty to their attack rolls and thetargets gain a +3).Because of the serious negative effects of strong light on thedrow, they are 75% likely to leave an area of bright light, unlessthey are in battle. Light sources like torches, lanterns, magicalweapons, or fame fire spells, do not affect drow.Habitat society: Long ago, dark elves were part of the eiven racethat roamed the world's forests. Not long after they were created,though, the elves found themselves torn into rival factions + onefollowing the tenets of evil, the other owning the ideals of good(or at least neutrality). A great civil war between the elves fol¬lowed, and the selfish elves who followed the paths of evil andchaos were driven into the depths of the earth, into the bleak,lightless caverns and deep tunnels of the underworld. These darkelves became the drow.The drow no longer wish to live upon the surface of the earth.In fact few who live on the surface ever see a drow. But the darkelves resent the elves and faeries who drove them away, andscheme against those that dw f ell in the sunlight.Drow live m magnificently dark, gloomy cities In the under¬world that few humans or demihumans ever see. They constructtheir buildings entirely out of stone and minerals, carved intoweird, fantastic shapes. Those few surface creatures that haveseen a dark elf city (and returned to tell the tale) report that it isthe stuff of which nightmares are made.Drow society is fragmented into many opposing noble housesand merchant families, all scrambling for power* In fact* all drowcarry brooches inscribed with the siTnboJ of the merchant or no¬ble group they are allied with, though they hide these and do notshow them often. The drow believe that the strongest shouldrule: their rigid class system, with a long and complicated list oftitles and prerogatives, is based on the idea.They worship a dark goddess, called Lolth by some, and herpriestesses hold very high places in society* Since most drowpriests are female, women tend to fill nearly all positions of greatimportance.Drow fighters go through rigorous training while they areyoung. Those who fail the required tests are killed at the pro¬gram's conclusion. That is why dark elf fighters of less than 2ndlevel are rarely seen outside a drow city.Drow often use giant lizards as pack animals, and frequentlytake bugbears or troglodytes as servants. Drew cities are havensfor evil beings, including mind flayers, and drow are allied withmany of the underworld's evil inhabitants. On the other hand,they are constantly at war with many of their neighbors beneaththe earth, including dwarves or dark gnomes (sviifneblin) whosettle to dose to a drow city* Dark elves frequently keep slaves ofall types, including past allies who have failed to live up to drowexpectations.Ecology: The drow produce unusual weapons and clothing withquasi-magicai properties. Some scribes and researchers suggestthat it is the strange radiation around drow cities that make drowcrafts spedaL Others theorize that fine workmanship gives theirwonderfully strong metals and superior cloth its unique attrib¬utes. Whatever the reason, it's clear that the drow have discov¬ered some way to make their clothing and weapons without theuse of magic.Direct sunlight utterly destroys drow cloth, boots, weapons*and armor. When any item produced by them is exposed to thelight of the sun, irreversible decay begins. Within 2d6 days, theitems lose their magical properties and rot* becoming totallyworthless. Drow artifacts* protected from sunlight, retain theirspecial properties for ld2O+30 days before becoming normalitems. If a drow item is protected from direct sunlight and ex¬posed to the radiations of the drow underworld for one week outof every four* it will retain its properties indefinitely.Droiw sleep poison, used on their darts and javelins, is highlyprized by traders on the surface. However, this poison loses itspotency instantly when exposed to sunlight, and remains effec¬tive for only 60 days after it is exposed to air. Drow poison re¬mains potent for a year if kept in an unopened packet.These strange creatures have the head and torso of a drow andthe legs and lower body of a giant spider. Driders are created bythe drow s dark goddess. When a dark elf of above-average abili¬ty reaches 6th level, the goddess may put him or her through aspecial test, Failures become driders.Driders are able to cast all spelts a normal drow can use onceper day. They also retain any magical or clerical skills they hadbefore transformation, A majority of driders (60%) were priestsof 6th or 7th level before they were changed, ail other driderswere mages of 6th, 7th, or 8th level,Driders always fight as 7 Hit Die monsters, They often useswords or axes, though many carry bows. Driders can bite forld4 points of damage* and those bitten must save vs, poison witha “2 penalty or be paralyzed for 1-2 turns.Because they have failed their goddess's test, driders are out¬casts from their own communities. Driders are usually foundalone or with 2d6 huge spiders (10% chance), rather than withdrow or other driders. They are violent* aggressive creatures thatfavor blood over all types of food. They stalk their victims tire¬lessly* waiting for the right chance to strike.
Ettercaps are ugly bipedal creatures that get along very well withall types of giant spiders. These creatures of low intelligence areexceedingly cruel very cunning, and are skilled in setting traps—very deadly traps—much like the spiders that often live aroundthem.Ettercaps stand around six feet tall even with their stoopinggait and hunched shoulders. The creatures have short, spindlylegs, long arms that reach nearly to their ankles, and large pot¬bellies. The hands of ettercaps have a thumb and three long fin¬gers that end in razor sharp claws. Their bodies are covered bytufts of thick, wiry, black hair, and their skin is dark and thick.Ettercaps* heads are almost equine in shape, but they have largereptilian eyes, usually blood-red in color, and large fangs, oneprotruding downward from each side of the mouth. The mouthitself js large and lined with very sharp teeth.Ettercaps do not have a formal language. They express them¬selves through a combination of high-pitched chittering noises,shrieks, and violent actions.Combat: If caught in a battle, an ettercap first strikes with itsclaws, causing 1-3 points of damage with each set. The creaturethen tries to bite its opponent, inflicting ld8 points of damagewith its teeth and powerful jaws. A successful bite attack by anettercap enables the monster to inject its victim with a powerfulpoison from the glands above the ettercap s fangs.The poison secreted by an ettercap is highly toxic and verysimilar to the poison of giant spiders. A creature injected with itmust immediately roll a saving throw vs. poison. A tailed roilmeans that the creature dies within Id4 turns when the toxigenparalyzes the victim's heart.Many adventurers never get the chance to raise a swordagainst ettercaps because of the devious traps they use for protec¬tion. Ettercaps prefer to ambush unwary travelers and lead theminto traps rather than fight them face to face.Like spiders, ettercaps have silk glands located in their abdo¬men. The thin, strong strands of silvery silk-like materia] theseglands secrete are used by ettercaps to construct elaborate trapsmade up of nets, trip wires, garottes, and any thing else the mon¬sters can make out of the strands. The traps are designed so thatthey often immobilize the adventurer who stumbles into it. If thisis the case, ettercaps never hesitate to attack that character first.trying to poison the victim before he escapes. Different ettercapsprefer different trap designs, so encounters with different etter¬caps should expose the adventurer to new traps each time.Habltat/Sodety: Ettercaps prefer to dwell in the deepest part ofa forest, near paths that are frequented by game or travelers, Thecreatures' nests are made of a frame of strands Filled with rottingleaves and moss. The lairs are often located on the ground, butcan also be found up in large, sturdy trees. No treasure is to befound in ettercap lairs, but occasionally items dropped by adven¬turers who have fallen into ettercap traps are found nearby,Though usually only one ettercap is encountered at any time,on rare occasions a pair of ettercaps can be found together. Thepairs encountered are always mated couples, though the femaleand male appear to be identical. Ettercap young are abandonedas soon as they are born, so adults are never encountered withyoung.Ecology: An ettercap eats any meat, regardless of the type ofcreature from which it comes. Upon capturing a victim, the etter¬cap poisons it so it cannot escape, once the creature is dead, theettercap immediately devours as much of the corpse as possible.Tvpically, an ettercap can consume an entire deer or a large hu¬manoid in a single sitting. Anything remaining after the ettercaphas gorged itself is left for scavengers.Often (40%), 2d4 spiders of some monstrous type are foundcooperating with an ettercap. The ettercap uses any giant spiderwebs available when it designs its traps. Creatures killed by anettercap in the web of a giant spider are shared with the spiderinstead of being devoured entirely by the ettercap.Ettercap poison is highly valued, partly because of its extremetoxicity and partly because it is rather difficult to obtain. An et-tercaps poison glands hold only one ounce of poison at any time,but this ounce is worth up to 1,000 gp on the open market.
Eyewings are loathsome inhabitants of the Abyss, They are obe¬dient, loyal and dumb—perfect servitors for the dark gods andtheir more powerful minions.An eyewings body is a tat, egg-shaped ball covered with mat¬ted black fur. The Moot-wide body is supported by a pair offive-foot-long leathery bat wings. Each wing is tipped with a setof three razor-sharp talons. An Moot-long rat's tail dangles fromthe back of the body. The tail ends in a small, sharp spur, it hasno feet and has never been known to land,The body is dominated by the single, bulging, 4-foot-wide eye¬ball. The eyeball is black with a blood-red pupil. A vile blue fluidcontinuously leaks from the eye, soiling its fur. Great leatheryeyelids squeeze this fluid out and away from the creature. Thestench is unbelievable. It gives off an acidic smell that scorchesthe sensitive tissues in other creatures" noses and mouths.Combat: An eyewing has two main forms of attack. The mostcommon form is to use its claws and tail to strike its opponents. Itcan either swoop down on them, or hover and slash. Its secondform of attack is to bomb its enemies with a large eyewing tearthat is squeezed out of the large eyeball by the leathery eyelid. Ithas amazing control over the release of the tear—it has the samechance to hit with a tear as with its melee attacks. It releases atear when it is within 100 feet of its target. It can deliver this at¬tack while hovering or diving.An eyewing tear is a one-f cot-diameter ball of poisonous bluefluid. The attack roll determines if the target dodged the tear. Ifthe tear hits, the victim must roll a successful saving throw vs.poison or suffer 2d6 points of damage (success means only Idopoints of damage). The tears may also splash onto anyone withinten feet of the target, The attack roll for the splash attack is madewith a -2 penalty. If someone is splashed, a saving throw vs. poi¬son must be rolled; those who fail suffer 2d4 points of damage,while those who succeed suffer ld4 points of damage.A tear hardens into a rubbery' lump within 2d6 hours after be¬ing shed. The exact time depends upon the humidity tempera¬ture, etc. Anybody handling a hardened tear must roil a success¬ful saving throw vs. poison or suffer 1 point of damage.Eyewings have extremely acute vision that enables them to seewith perfect accuracy for up to 25 miles. They also have infra-vision out to 120 feet. They are immune to ail cold-based attackforms, as are their tears.Habital/Sodety: Eyewings are supernatural creatures that existonly to serve their dark masters. When left without orders theybecome sluggish and listless* This should not be taken to meanthat they are any less dangerous. This listlessness is their expres¬sion of boredom, but nothing relieves eyewing boredom quitelike tearing apart innocent creatures,Eyewings have no society as such. They do not have a cultureTheir simple language consists of shrill squeaks. They under¬stand other spoken languages, but cannot speak them. When inthe Abyss they are found only on layers that allow for flying.Their immunity to cold makes them at home on any of the Icylayers as well.Ecology: Eyewings are sexless creatures that are not a part ofnature. They kill even when they're not ordered to, just for thepleasure of it. Eyewings have been encountered on the moon,where there is no air to breathe and no water to drink. It is as¬sumed that they do not need air or water. They have never beenseen to eat; it is assumed by most who have studied them thatthey are sustained by magic. The more powerful creatures of theAbyss have no qualms about an eyewing snack should one benearby, but they are not the natural prey of any creature.
Feyrs (pronounced "fears") are created from the remnants of or¬dinary nightmares, mixed with residua] magical energies, andunknowingly brought to life by the strong emotions of a largegroup of people. They are most commonly found in large citiesthat have a good number of mages, priests, and other spell-casters, Normal feyrs stalk the streets at night, seeking nothingmore than to create havoc. Great feyrs. on the other hand, arethe combination of lesser feyrs, and may be found anywhere,though they a much rarer than the common feyrs.Common feyrs appear as humped, hunchbacked creatures,grim and inhuman in appearance, Their hide is mottled andwarped like the surface of the human brain. The creature is sup¬ported by two main tentacles which act as legs, and by a handfulof other tentacJed limbs. Massive horizontal jaws line its under¬side, and the forepart of the beast has 1-5 eyes, usually the colorof melted gold. The feyrs hide is a sickly rainbow of shades, likelight reflected off an oil slick. There are dull blues and blacksalong the body pale reds and magentas toward the head, anddeathly greens and yellows along the belly.Combat: The horizontal jaws of the feyr slung beneath its bellyare the creature s prime form of attack, inflicting ld4 points ofdamage for common feyrs, 2d6 points for great feyrs. The feyrdoes not use its jaws to eat, but rather to strike terror into thehearts of those who witness its savage and bloody attacks. Thosewho witness the attack of either type of feyr must make a success¬ful saving throw vs. spells or be consumed by fear (as the spell ofthe same name', This fear acts for ld4 rounds for common feyrs,and 2d6 rounds for great feyrs. This form of fear only applieswhen the creature attacks, Merely sighting a common feyr doesnot inspire fear .The great feyr has an additional power that can affect the emo¬tions similar to the 4thdevel wizard spell emotion , The range ofthis attack is 100 yards, may affect a 20-foot by 20-foot area, andthe intended victim must make a successful saving throw vs,spells at _ 2 or be affected. Only the negative emotions of fear ;hale, hopelessness , and sadness may be cast by the great feyr.The great feyr may cast this spell and retain its invbibility .Common feyrs are slain by direct sunlight, though they haveno fear of it themselves, and do not seek shelter with the comingsun , nor hesitate to venture out if they are still alive after sun-up.Common feyrs can use a saving throw vs, spells against sunlightcreated by magic spells, such as conffmioi tight in addition totheir standard magic resistance. Greater fevrs are unaffected bysunlight.Habitat/Society: Individual common feyrs are slain by the morn¬ing light. There are occasions when several common feyrs com¬bine to form a great feyr, which in addition to being immune tothe effects of the sun, is much more intelligent. The greater feyrseeks to inspire even stronger emotions, which it may then use tostay alive. While common feyrs do not travel far from their pointof origin, great feyrs may undertake long trips, lured by strongemotional states.While a common feyr merely slouches through the eveningshadows and fogs, looking for a collection of victims to terrorizeand thereby enrich itself on their emotions, a great feyr choosesto attack while invisible, playing the emotions of others, height¬ening emotional states already present, and driving mortal be¬ings mad with terror and fear. While the great feyr Is notbanished by daylight, it prefers to work at night, and seeks toretreat into a hidden lair during daylight hours, preferably someabandoned area such as an old house, cavern, or undergroundstructure.Ecology: Common feyrs are created by the emotions of largemasses of people, and great feyrs by compilations of lesser feyrs.The raw materials for such creatures may be found in any urbansettlement, and when there is additional tension in the air, thefeyrs stalk at night. Cities under siege, towns divided by rivalriesor civil wars, oppressed peoples, and settlements baking under amerciless summer heat are all possible breeding grounds of feyrs.Guard and watch units are usually more than sufficient to handlethe common feyrs, as those feyrs attack anything that moves.But the more dangerous great feyrs must be dealt with by a wiz¬ard or similar high-level individual, who can both withstand theattack of the feyr and dispatch it*
Giant hsh are a diverse group ot creatures with varying attack and de¬fense capabilities. Many of these creatures are able to swallow victimswhole. Swallowed victims take normal bite damage. Victims take 1 poinlof damage per round from the fish's digestive juices and have a 5% cumu¬lative chance per round of suffocating. To escape the fish's stomach, avictim can cut free with a sharp-edged weapon. The victim may be res¬cued by cutting or tearing from the outside. When the fish has lost 50% ofits hit points, the victim breaks free.The first due that a barracuda is in the area might be a sudden pain in thefoot, as the marauder swims by and bites off a few tender toes. They arefound in warm salt waters.Giant carp attack by biting, inflicting 2-20 points of damage with theirsharp, curved teeth. Additionally, if an attack causes 12 or more points ofdamage, the carp swallows its victim.A giant catfish bites for 3d4 points of damage, ll swallows it prey if itsattack roll is 4 points more than it needed. The fish can employ its feelersas weapons by whipping its head back and forth. These feelers secrete atoxin that causes 2d4 points of damage. A save vs. poison limits the dam¬age La ld4 points. Two additional opponents can be attacked if they arewithin range of the feelers,Dragonfish bite for 1-6 points of damage. However, most adventurersstumble across these Creatures, These encounters cause ld6 of the fish'sspines to penetrate boots, causing 1 point of damage apiece before snap¬ping off In the wound. The spines' poison is slow-acting, and creaturesinjected with the toxin must make a saving throw vs. poison at a ^4 ordies. If successful, the character suffers a -2 penalty on all attack rollsfor the next ld!2 +4 hours.An attacking ed discharges a jolt of electricity with a 15-foot-radiusrange. Creatures less than 5 feet from the eel suffer 3d8 points of damage,creatures 5 to 10 feeL away receive 2dS points, and all others in rangesuffer ld8 points. An eel must recharge itself for an hour between attacks.It is immune to electrical effects.Giant eels have no electrical discharge attack. Instead, they attack with
their teeth. Since they strike with amazing speed, giant eels receive a +1bonus to initiative rolls.Marine eels have an electrical discharge with a range of 15 feet: creaturesless than 5 feet from the eel suffer 6d6 points of damage, those 5 to 10 feetaway receive 4d6 points, and all others in range suffer 2d6 points. Vic¬tims must roll a saving throw vs. paralyzafiori or be stunned for a numberoi rounds equal to the damage they sustained from the electrical shock.This eel, too, Is immune to electrical effects,The bite of the weed eel Es poisonous; victims failing a saving throw' vs.poison die in ld4 rounds.Weed eels are at home in both fresh and salt water, 25 to 40 feet deep.Each colony has a Eair consisting oi a central cave, roughly 30 feel longand 20 ieei wide and high. The floor of the central cave Is covered withsmall stones, coins, and gems that the eels have scavenged. Radiatingfrom this central cave are a series of 6-foot-diameter tunnels, which inturn lead to a neEurork of 6 to S-inch-dia meter holes. These are the homesof the individual eeb that make up the colony. Weed ceLs are fiercely pro¬tective of their lairs, especially the central cave where their young areraised.The gar attacks with its teeth, inflicting 8d4 points of damage. On a scoreof 20, the gar swallows its victim whole, On average, a giant gar canswallow an object up to 5 feet long. Giant gars are found in deep, fresh¬water lakes and rivers.The lamprey feeds by biting its victims, and fastening itself by itssphincter-1 ike mouth. Once attached, the lamprey drains 2 hit points perHit Die of blood on she next and successive rounds. Sea lampreys areespecially susceptible to fire, making their saving throws against fire-based attacks with a “2 penalty,Land lampreys feed as do aquatic ones, Once attached (a hit for 1 point ofdamage 1, it drains blood tor three rounds, unless killed nr removed, for 1point of damage per round. In addition, while attached to a character,each lamprey encumbers an individual- this is equivalent to a loss of 1point of Dexterity per lamprey attached.If the manta's attack roll is 2 or more greater I ban the number needed tohit. it swallows its prey, A manta ray can swallow one man-sized creatureor three small-sized creatures. If opponents attack its rear, it uses its sting¬er for 2-20 points of damage? victims must save vs. paralyzation or bestunned for 2-3 rounds.Because of Its speed and natural camouflage, a pikes opponents suffer a-2 penalty to their surprise roll. Giant pike inhabit deep, freshwaterlakes.Piranhas travel in schools of 5-50. There is a 75% chance that at least onewill attack any creature that swims or wades near the school. If they at¬tack and blood is drawn, the entire school goes berserk and each piranhaattacks twice per melee round Up to 20 piranhas can attack a single,man-sized individual simultaneously.Giant piranhas behave like Lheir smaller counterparts, but only 10 canattack a single, man-sized individual simultaneously.Giant piranhas are sometimes called sky-eaters; once per round they cancharge at full speed and leap out of the water at heights of up to 10 feetrthey often use this attack on water fowl that fly low over the water, butthey* sometimes use it against humans.Any creature stepping on a pungi must save vs. poison or die. A footstepon a pungi ray equals one attack; if a creature fell on a pungi ray it wouldsuffer 2-S spinal attacks. If attacked, it swims away.Quippers are freshwater piranhas that live in colder waters.A sea horse attacks with a head butt, but a sea horse Lrained as a steed canuse its long tail to constrict and restrain enemies. A captured opponentcan free itself with a open doors roll made with a — 1 penalty. The tail of agiant sea horse is so tong It can attack the same opponent its head butts,or the one its rider is attacking. The constriction causes no damage, bulthe sea horse tan still butt the helpless victim.Sharks attack mercilessly at the scent of blood, which they can detect amile away. The scent of blood and the thrill of the kill sends sharks into afeeding frenzy. Since sharks move up, take a bite of flesh, and retreat, 10normal-sized sharks can attack a man-sized opponent.The huge megalodons (giant sharks) never reach a frenzy, since they canswallow most creatures whole on an attack roll 4 greater than minimumnumber needed to hit.If a creature steps on a sting ray. It lashes out with its tail spine. The crea¬ture must save vs. poison or be paralyzed for 5-20 turns.
Giant Frogs: Giant frogs resemble their more common relativesin everything but size. Their enormous size means that they con¬sider larger creatures as a source of food, making small creaturesand even demihumans possible prey, A giant frog can range from2 to 6 feet in length and weigh between 50 and 250 pounds (a 2-foot frog weighs 50 pounds, adding 50 pounds for each addition*al foot of length) . Frogs with 1 Hit Die are 2 feet long, while those2 to 4 feet long have 2 Hit Dice, and those over 4 feet long have 3Hit Dice.The distance that a giant frog can jump is based upon itsweight, with the maximum jumping distance for a 50-pound frogbeing 180 feet. Subtract 20 feet for every additional 50 poundsthe frog weighs. A giant frog cannot jump backward or directlyto either side, but can leap 30 feet straight up.Combat: Because of its camouflaging color, a giant frog surprisesopponents easily (-3 penalty to opponents' surprise rolls) when inits natural habitat. A giant frog uses its long, sticky tongue toentrap its victim. The tongue is equal in length to three times thefrog's length and strikes with a +4 bonus to the attack roll. Thetongue inflicts no damage when it hits.Once a victim is caught by the frog s tongue, it has one chanceto hit the tongue before the frog attempts to reel it in. If thetongue is hit the frog releases the victim and does not attack thatcreature again. Otherwise, the victim is reeled in.If the victim weighs less than the frog, it is dragged into thefrog's mouth in the same round it attacked and missed strikingthe tongue. If the creature weighs more than the frog, an extraround is required tor the frog to draw the creature in. This grantsthe victim another opportunity to hit the tongue. Any creatureweighing more than twice the frog's weight cannot be pulled bythe frog and is released on the third round alter it was caught,even if the tongue is never struck.Once the victim has been drawn to the frog's mouth, the frogattempts to eat it* If the giant frog successfully bites its victim inthe first round the creature is in range, it automatically scoresmaximum damage. Frogs with 1 Hit Die bite for 1-3 points ofdamage, those with 2 Hit Dice 1-6 points, and those with 3 HitDice inflict 2-8 points of biting damage.On an attack roll result of 20, the frog can swallow whole anycreature shorter than 3 feet Jong, Any creature swallowed wholehas a chance to cut its way out of the frog with a sharp-edgedweapon, but must roll an attack roll result of 18 or better. A vic¬tim has only three rounds to escape before asphyxiating. A suc¬cessful escape kills the frog* Any damage inflicted upon a frogthat has swallowed a creature whole has a 33% chance of alsobeing inflicted on the swallowed victim.Habitat/Societys Giant frogs live in groups but don t have anyreal social structure. They are aggressive hunters and eat insects,fish, and small mammals. Large aquatic predators such as giantfish and giant turtles often prey upon them.Killer Frogs: This smaller version of the giant frog attacks withsharp teeth and front talons. While it does not swallow victimswhole, the killer frog is a vicious hunter and is especially fond ofthe taste of human flesh.Poisonous Frogs: A rare type of normal frog, this breed secretesa contact poison from Us skin, as well as with its bite. The weak¬ness of the poison gives all victims a +4 bonus to their savingthrows. Due to its weakness and the difficulty of collecting it,there is no market for this poison.
Fungi are simple plants that lack chlorophyll, true stems, roots,and leaves. Fungi are incapable of photosynthesis and live as par¬asites or saprophytes.Ordinary fungi are well known to man- molds, yeast, mildew,mushrooms, and puffballs. These plants include both useful andharmful varieties.Combat: Ordinary fungi do not attack or defend themselves,but they are prolific and can spread where unwanted.Adventurers who have lost rations to mold or clothing to mil¬dew have had unpleasant encounters with fungi.Habitat/Soriety: The bodies of most true fungi consist of slen*der cottony filaments. Anyone who wishes to see this for himselfneed only leave a damp piece of bread in a cupboard for a day ortwo. Examining the black mold on the bread with a magnifyingglass will show off not only the filaments, but also the sporebodies at the top of these. The spores are what gives mold itscolor.Most fungi reproduce asexually by cell division, budding,fragmentation, or spores. Those that reproduce sexually alter¬nate a sexual generation (gam etop byte) with a spore-produdng(sporophyte) one.Fungi grow best in dark, damp environments, which they canfind all too easily in a kitchen cupboard, backpack, or boot. Awarm environment is preferred by some, such as yeasts and cer¬tain molds, but excessive heat kills fungi.Proper storage and cleanliness can be used to avoid most ordi¬nary fungi.Ecology: Fungi break down organic matter, thus playing an im¬portant part in the nitrogen cycle by decomposing dead organ¬isms into ammonia. Without the action of mushrooms andbracket fungi, soil renewal could not take place as readily as itdoes.Fungi are also useful to man for many purposes. Yeasts arevaluable as fermenting agents, raising bread and brewing wines,beers, and ales. Certain molds are important for cheese produc¬tion. The color in blue cheese is a mold that has been encouragedto grow in this semisoft cheese.Many fungi are edible, and connoisseurs consider some to bedelicious. Pigs are used to hunt for truffles, an underground fun¬gus that grows near tree roots and gives food a piquant flavor.No one has as yet managed to cultivate truffles—an enterprisingbotanist could make a mint by learning to grow these.Mushrooms, the fruiting body of another underground fun¬gus, can sometimes be eaten, but can be so poisonous that thenovice mushroom hunter is allowed but one mistake in picking.The mycelium producing a single mushroom might extend be¬neath the ground for several feet in any direction.Medicinally, green molds (such as penirillium) can be used asfolk remedies for various bacterial infections.
An alchemist expert in the ways of fungi can produces varietyof useful substances from their action on various materials,Violet fungus growths resemble shriekers, and are usually (75%)encountered with them. The latter are immune to the touch ofviolet fungi, and the two types of creatures complement eachothers existence.Combat: Violet fungi favor rotted animal matter to grow upon.Each fungus has one to four branches with which it Flails out ifany animal comes within range (see following). The excretionfrom these branches rots flesh in one round unless a successfulsaving throw vs. poison is rolled or a cure disease spell is used.The branch length of this fungi depends upon the fungi's size, Vi¬olet fungi range from four to seven feet talk the smallest havingone-foot-long branches, the five-foot-tall fungi having two-foot-long branches, and so on. Any sized growth can have up to fourbranches.Shriekers are normally quiet, mindless fungi that are ambulatory.They are dangerous to dungeon explorers because of the hellishracket they make.Combat: Light within 30 feet or movement within 10 feetcauses a shrieker to emit a piercing shriek that lasts for 1-3rounds. This noise has a 50% chance of attracting wanderingmonsters each round thereafter.Habitat Society; They live in dark places beneath the ground,often in the company of violet fungi. When the shriekers attractcurious dungeon dwellers by their shrieking, the violet fungi areable to kill them with their branches, leaving plenty of organicmatter for these saprophytic life forms to feed on.Ecology: Purple worms and shambling mounds greatly prizeshriekers as food, and don t seem to mind the noise while eating,Shrieker spores are an important ingredient in potions of plantcontrol*The algae-like phycomids resemble fibrous blobs of decompos¬ing. milk-colored matter with capped fungi growing out of them.They exude a highly alkaline substance (like lye) when attacking.Combat: These fungoid monsters have sensory organs for heat,sound, and vibrations located in several dusters. When phy-comids attack, they extrude a tube and discharge the alkaline flu¬id in small globules that have a range of Id6 + P feet.In addition to alkaline damage, the globs that these creaturesdischarge might also cause victims to serve as hosts for new phy¬comid growth. If a victim fails a saving throw vs. poison, theindividual begins to sprout mushroom-like growths in the infect¬ed area. This occurs in ld4 + 4 rounds and inflicts ld4 + 4 pointsof damage. The growths then spread throughout the host body,killing it in ld4 +4 turns, and turning it into a new phycomid. Acure disease spell will stop the spread through the host.Ascomolds are huge, puffball-like fungi with very thick, leatheryskin. They move by rolling.Combat: At first, an asco mold's movement is slow—3 for thefirst round, 6 the next, then 9, then finally 12—but they can keepit tip for hours without tiring.Ascomoids attack by rolling into or over opponents. Small-and medium-sized opponents are knocked down and must riseduring the next round or remain prone,The creature’s surface is covered with numerous pocks whichserve as sensory organs. Each pock can also emit a jet of spores toattack dangerous enemies. Large opponents or those who haveInflicted damage upon the ascomoids are always attacked byspore jets* The stream of spores is about one foot in diameter and30 feet long* Upon striking, the stream puffs into a cloud of varia¬ble diameter (five to 20 feet). The creatures under attack mustroll a successful saving throw vs. poison or die from infection intheir internal systems in ld4 rounds. Even those who save areblinded and choked to such an extent that they require ld4rounds to recover and rejoin melee. Meanwhile, they are nearlyhelpless, and all attacks upon them gain a +4 bonus to attackrolls with no shield or Dexterity bonuses allowed.Different types of weapons affect the ascomoid differently.Piercing weapons, such as spears, score double damage. Shorterstabbing weapons do damage as if against a small-sized oppo¬nent, Blunt weapons do not harm ascomoids: slashes and cutsfrom edged weapons cause only 1 point of damage. An ascomoidsaves against magical attacks, such a*s magic missiles, fireballs,and lightning, with a +4 bonus to the saving throw; damage isonly 50% of normal. (Cold-based attacks are at normal probabil¬ities and damaged As these fungi have no minds by ordinarystandards, all spells affecting the brain (charm. ESP, etc. ), unlessspecific to plants, are useless,At any distance greater than 10 feet, a gas spore is 90% likely tobe mistaken for a beholder. Even at close ranges there is a 25%possibility that the creature is seen as a beholder, for a gas sporehas a false central eye and rhizome growths atop it that stronglyresemble the eye stalks of a beholder.Combat: If the spore is struck for even 1 point oi damage it ex¬plodes. Every creature within a 20-foot radius suffers 6d6 pointsof damage (3d6 if a saving throw vs. wands is successful).If a gas spore makes contact with exposed flesh, the sporeshoots tiny rhizomes into the living matter and grows throughthe victim's system within one round. The gas spore dies immedi¬ately. The victim must have a cure disease spell cast on him with¬in 24 hours or die, sprouting 2d4 gas spores*The galeb duhr is a curious boulder-like creature with append¬ages that art as hands and feet. These intelligent beings are verylarge and slow-moving. They live in rocky or mountainous areasw here they can feel the earth power and control the rocks aroundthem.A typical galeb duhr is from 8 to 12 feet tall. When not movingit looks like part of the terrain it lives in.Combat: Caleb duhr are fairly solitary creatures, preferring tolive with a few of their own kind, and none of any other kind,including earth elemental. When approached, a galeb duhr is li¬able to avoid the encounter by disappearing into the ground. Ifchased or otherwise irritated, however, a galeb duhr does nothesitate to fight the intruder.Caleb duhr can cast the following spells as ZOth-level mages,once per day: move earth, stone shape, passwall transmuterock to mud, and wall of stone. They can cast stone shape at willThey can animate 1-2 boulders within 60 yards of them (AC 0;MV 3; HD 9; Dam 4d6) as a treant controls trees. Galeb duhrsuffer double damage from cold-based attacks and save with a -4penalty against these attacks. They are not harmed by lightningor normal fire, but suffer full damage from magical fire (thoughthey save with a +4 bonus against fire attacks),Habit a ^Society: Galeb duhr, thought to be native to the ele¬mental plane of Earth, are sometimes encountered in small familygroups in mountainous regions of the Prime Material plane.It is not known how (or whether) galeb duhr reproduce, but"young" galeb duhr have occasionally been reported—thosespecimens encountered being a smaller size than normal.While galeb duhr seem to have no visible culture aboveground , they are known to collect gems, which they find throughtheir passwall ability They sometimes have small magical itemsin their possession, evidently taken from those who attackedthem to take their gems.The "music" of the galeb duhr often provides the first evidencethat these creatures are near—and usually the only evidence, asthe unsociable galeb duhr are quick to pass into the ground whenthey feel the vibrations of approaching visitors.Sitting together in groups, the galeb duhr harmonize theirgravelly voices into eldritch tunes; some sages speculate thatthese melodies can cause or prevent earthquakes. Others arguethat the low rumbling produced by these creatures is a form ofwarning to others in the group, but there is no conclusive evi¬dence either wayEcology: Galeb duhr have no natural enemies, other than thosewho crave the gems they collect- Caleb duhr eat rock, preferringgranite to other types, and disdaining any sedimentary type. Therocks they eat become part of the huge creatures; such a mealneed take place only once every two or three months.Besides the gems that they carry with them, galeb duhr arelikely to know where many other gems are, as well as veins ofprecious metals, such as gold, silver, and platinum, though galebduhr seem to have no interest in these minerals for themselves. Afew powerful mages have been able to bargain with the galebduhr for this information. This is a difficult agreement to con¬summate, for the galeb duhr are valiant fighters, and usuallyhave no difficulty in escaping from any harm if they are inclinedto do so. Further, the galeb duhr are territorial, and would beirritated at any attempt to make use of this knowledge in theirvicinityin some strange way, galeb duhr feel responsible for thesmaller rocks and boulders around them, in much the same waythat a treant feels responsible for trees in its neighborhood. Atraveler who disturbs the area near a galeb duhr does so at hisown peril.
Gargantua are truly monstrous species, both in size and ferocity.Whether they are throwbacks to another age, aberrations of naturalprocesses, or results of crazed magical experiments is unknown.Gargantua appear in many different forms., but most resemble gi-gantic humanoids, insects, and reptiles. Of these three types, themost common is also the largest and most dangerous: the reptiliangargantua.The reptilian gargantua is so immense that it dwarfs virtually all of theworlds creatures. Some reptilian gargantua move on all fours. Most,however, are bipedal, supported by two massive legs rivaling the widthof the largest tree trunks. The creature's body is thick and bulky Rockyscales—usually dark green with black accents—cover it from head totoe. Its smooth belly is a lighter shade of green. Certain rare types havemottled scales in shades of brown, gray and yellow.Its hands are almost human, though each of its four, long fingers endsin a hooked daw. Its feet are flat and broad, with webbed toes. The toe*also end in hooked daws, but they're shorter and thicker than those onits fingers, A bony ridge stretches from the base of Its neck, down alongits spine, and extending the length of its immense tail.The head of the reptilian gargantua is somewhat small in propor¬tion to its body. It has two glaring eyes, usually gold or bright red. Itsnostrils are flush with its head, and its ears are twin triangular projec¬tions resembling tiny wings, Its mouth is a wide slash that nearly bi¬sects its entire head and is lined with rows of long fangs.The reptilian gargantua cannot speak, but H emits deafening roarsthat sound like the trumpeting of a bull elephant amplified a thou¬sandfold. It can breathe both air and water.Combat; Although it has some degree of intelligence, the actions ofthe reptilian gargantua—along with the actions of most gargantua—are those of mindless brutes bent on destruction for destruction^ sa¬ke. It attacks with sweeping rakes of its front claws and lunging bitesfrom its powerful jaws. If moving upright, it can trample victims forID-100 llOdlO) hit points of damage. It continually sweeps theground it with its massive tail, swinging 90 feet behind it and to eachside. Any creature within range of the tail must make a successfulsaving throw vs. death or suffer 5-80 (SdtO) hit points of damage.A rampaging reptilian gargantua is all but oblivious to its surround¬ings, crushing everything—and everyone—in its path. The ground trem¬bles under its weight when it walks. Since quaking earth alwaysforeshadows its appearance, it never cm surprise its prey. When swim¬ming, a reptilian gargantua is similarly handicapped, as its appearance isalways preceded by swirling waters or crashing waves. Additionally itsimmense size makes it easy to spot from a distance. Furthermore, thesquealing roars that accompany its every action make it virtually impos¬sible to ignore,The reptilian gargantuan tough hide gives it an Armor Class of 2,forming a strong defense against most physical attacks. When it doessuffer damage, the creature can regenerate 4 hit points per round.Fortunately, reptilian gargantua seldom bother humans. But theirmemories are long, and their appetite for revenge is nearly limitless.Humans who attack reptilian gargantua, disturb their lairs, or other¬wise provoke the creatures will find themselves relentlesslypursued—even it means the gargantua must cross thousands of milesof ocean. This creatures hunger for revenge is seldom satisfied until ithas thoroughly ravaged its attackers' villages. Sometimes, entireprovinces will be laid to ruin.The surest way to provoke the wrath of a reptilian gargantua is tothreaten its offspring. Adult gargantua have remarkable mentalbonds with thek young, enabling them to locate their young withpinpoint accuracy at an unlimited range.In spite of thek reputation as mindless destroyers, reptilian gargan-lua actually possess a simple empathy that enables them to sense theemotions and desires of others, albeit on a primitive level. They seemto instinctively know which creatures bear them ill will, and directtheir attacks accordingly.HabitabSociety; A few reptilian guargantua make their home on thefloors of subtropical oceans. Most, however, live on remote tropicalislands, far from civilized lands. Such islands are scattered through¬out the oceans of Kara-Tur, with most of them uncharted, The mostnotable exception is the Isle of Gargantua* one of the Outer Isles offthe southwestern tip of Wa. This island is Inhabited entirely bygargantua of various types.Explorers in the arctic regions of Kara-Tur once found a maturingreptilian gargantua frozen in a block of ice. The explorers built a mas¬sive sled to haul their discovery back to civilization. The ice began tothaw en route, reviving the creature, The gargantua shattered the melt¬ing ice block, crushed his captors, and lumbered into ihe mountains.Any grotto or cave that provides shelter, privacy, and sufficientroom to house a reptilian gargantua cart serve as its lair. Fiercely ter¬ritorial, a reptilian gargantua and its family usually claim an area ofseveral square miles as their personal property, defending it againstany and all intruders. Since their eyes are sensitive to bright light, thecreatures spend most of the day sleeping in their lairs, becomingactive at night to search for food and patrol their territory". Their
thunderous roars make their presence known to all. Reptiliangargantua do not collect treasure or any other items.Reptilian gargantua live several hundred years. They choose mateswithin a few years of reaching maturity, and remain with them forthe rest of their lives. A female reptilian gargantua gives birth to asingle offspring once per century, The birth of a reptilian gargantua ismarked hv shattering thunderstorms that rock the skies over the ter¬ritory of its parents for 101 days.An immature reptilian gargantua stands about 20-40 feet tall. Italso has 10 HD <THAC0 11) and a movement rate oi 12 (Sw 9) Ayounglings daws inflict 1-10 hit points of damage each, and its biteinflicts 2-24 (2dl2.) hit points of damage, Its tail—not nearly as formi¬dable as an adult's—sweeps the ground in an arch reaching 20 feetbehind and to both sides, inflicting MS (3d6) points of damage to allvictims who fail their save vs, death.Ecology; The reptilian gargantua is an omnivore, it primarily eatsplants, swallowing whole trees in a single gulp. But it also enjoys liv¬ing prey of all varieties. It can even dine on minerals, gems, and otherinorganic substances in times of scarce vegetation and game.Reptilian gargantua shun the company of other creatures. They es¬pecially dislike other types of gargantua. which sometimes compete*vith their reptilian cousins for the same territory.Reptilian gargantua have two properties useful to humans;gargantua can serve as a component for a ffttfrou of growth , Such aflower must grow' naturally in the footprint; it cannot have been plantedthere by a human or other intelligent being,• As noted above, thunderstorms occur when a reptilian gargan¬tua is bom . If a dead creature of any kind is struck by a lightning boltfrom such a storm, the bolt acts as resurrection spell.Humanoid gargantua are the least intelligent type. They resemble gi¬gantic humans,. somewhat anthropoid facially, with stooped shoul¬ders, long arms, and jutting jaws, Long, greasy hair dangles abouttheir shoulders, though a few humanoid gargantua are completelybald. They stand 80 to 100 ieet tall and are sometimes covered withblack, brown, or golden fur, Their skin color ranges from pale pinkto dull yellow to deep black, They have blunt noses, huge ears, andbright eyes, which are usually brown or red. Single-eyed humanoidgargantua also are rumored to exist.Humanoid gargantua have no language of their own, but becauseof their strong empathy with humans, they are able to comprehendshort phrases of human languages 25% of the time. The movementsand other actions of humanoid gargantua are typically accompaniedby thunderous bellowing and grunting.The creature attacks with its two fists for 4-40 (3dl0) hit points ofdamage each. It seldom uses weapons or tools, since its blunt fingersmanipulate these objects with difficulty. However, reports exist ofhumanoid gargantua wielding trees like clubs. The creatures also canmake trampling attacks on anyone tor anything) who comes under¬foot, causing 10-100 < lOdlO) points of damage. Humanoid gargantuaregenerate hit points at the rate of 4 per round.Like reptilian gargantua, humanoid gaigantua possess a simple empa¬thy that enables them to sense the basic emotions and desires of others.Unless hungry they tend to avoid creatures who intend them no harm,while actively seeking out and pursuing those with hostile intentions.Humanoid gargantua live in valleys, in suitably sized caves in re¬mote. jagged mountains, or on their own islands, far from civilizedregions. They collect no treasure, spending most of their time eatingand sleeping,They live for several centuries, and mate for life. Once every hun¬dred years or so. a female humanoid gargantua gives birth to 1-2 off¬spring. An immature humanoid gargantua is about 20-30 feet tall. Ithas 8 HD (THACO 13) and a movement rate of 15. Its fists inflict 1-10points of damage each, It cannot make trampling attacks.These monsters peacefully coexist w ith other creatures in their en¬vironment. but humanoid gargantua compete fiercely with rivalgargantua, and violent conflicts often result. Many such conflictsHumanoid gargantua eat all types of game and vegetation, prefer¬ring deer, bears, horses, and similar game,Adult insectoid gargantua resemble immense moths. Their bodies arecovered w + jlh fine fur, usually gray or black, and their wings bearcolorful patterns in brilliant blue, red, yellow, and green, Theirmovements and other actions are accompanied by a piercing screechthat sounds like a warning siren.The insectoid gargantua begins life as a gigantic egg, which hatchesto reveal a gigantic larva. This larval form has 20 HD, As a larva, theinsectoid gargantua can shoot a strand of cocoon silk to a range of 60feet. This silk is exceptionally strong and sticky, adhering to what¬ever it hits. With this silken strand, the larva can entangle and immo¬bilize victims. A strand can be severed in three ways: with 20 pointsot damage from an edged weapon, a successful J 'bend bars/lift gates"roll, or by monsters of 10 HD or more.The larval insectoid gargantua grows at a phenomenal rate> in¬creasing 1 HD per week, Upon attaining 25 HD, the larva spins acocoon and enters the pupal stage. It remains a pupa for 2-6 (2d4)weeks, finally emerging as an immense moth with 30 HD. In thisform, the creature can no longer spin silk. However, by flapping itswings, it can create a huge windstorm, 60 feet wide and extending240 feet ahead. To remain safe, everyone and everything within thepath of the storm must be solidly anchored (e.g., tied to a boulder).Unanchored victims must make a saving throw vs. death with a -4penalty. Those who fail their saving throw are blown back 10 to 40feet, suffering ld6 hit points of damage for every 10 feet blown.Insectoid gargantua establish lairs in the valleys and caverns ofw p arm, mountainous regions. They live f or several hundred years. Fe¬males lay a single egg every' decade, but there is only a 20% chancethat any given egg is fertile.These mothlike creatures eat all types of game and vegetation.They prefer mulberry trees, and in just a few hours, a hungry insec¬toid gargantua can consume an entire grove of them.The silk of insectoid gargantua larvae can be woven Into dothfrom which magical robes are created.
These monsters are ferocious predators of a magical nature, typi¬cally found amid ruins or dwelling in underground caverns. Theyhave their own guttural language.Combat: Gargoyles attack anything they detect, regardless ofwhether it is good or evil, 90% of the time. They love best totorture prey to death when it is helpless.These winged creatures are excellent fighters with four attacksper round. Their claw/daw/bite/hom combination can inflictup to 16 points of damage, while their naturally tough hide pro¬tects them from victim's attacks.Gargoyles favor two types of attack: surprise and swooping.Counting on their appearance as sculptures of some sort, gar¬goyles sit motionless around the rooftop of a building, waitingfor prey to approach. Alternatively, a gargoyle may pose in afountain, or a pair of the horrid beasts sit on either side of a door¬way. When the victim is close enough, the gargoyles suddenlystrike out, attempting only to injure the victim rather than to killit all at once. (To a gargoyle, inflicting a s3ow\ painful death isbest.)When on the move, gargoyles sometimes use a "swoop" at¬tack, dropping down suddenly from the sky to make their at¬tacks in an aerial ambush. In this case, they can make either twoclaw attacks or one hom attack. To make all four of their attacks,they must land,HabitatSodety: Gargoyles live in small groups with others oftheir kind, interested in little more than finding other creatures tohurt. Smaller animals are scarcely worth the trouble to these hid¬eous monsters, who prefer to attack humans or other intelligentcreatures.Gargoyles often collect treasure from human victims. Individ¬uals usually have a handful of gold pieces among them, with thebulk of their treasure hidden carefully at their lair, usually buriedor under a large stone,Ecology: Originally, gargoyles were carved roof spouts, repre¬senting grotesque human and animal figures. They were designedin such a way that water flowing down gutters would be thrownaway from the wall, so as to prevent stains and erosion. Later,some unknown mage used a powerful enchantment to bring thesehorrid sculptures to life* The race of gargoyles has flourished,spreading throughout the world.Gargoyles do not need to eat or drink, so they can stand mo¬tionless for as long as they wish almost anywhere. The damagethey do to other creatures is not for sustenance, but only for theirdistorted sense of pleasure.Because they are fairly intelligent and evil, they will sometimesserve an evil master of some sort, In this case, the gargoyles usu¬ally act as guards or messengers: besides some gold or a fewgems, their unsavory payment is the enjoyment they get fromattacking unwanted visitors.The horn of the gargoyle is the more common active ingredientfor a potion of invulnerability and can also be used in a potion offlying.This creature is a marine variety of gargoyle that uses its wings toswim as fast as the land-dwelling gargoyle flies, Kapoacinth con¬form in all respects to a normal gargoyle. They dwell in relativelyshallow waters, lairing in undersea caves.Like gargoyles, kapoacinth are eager to cause pain to others,and mermen, sea elves, and human visitors are all equally quali¬fied candidates for this.Margoyles are a more horrid form of gargoyle. They are foundmainly in caves and caverns. Their skin is so like stone that theyare only 20% likely to be seen when against it. They attack withtwo claws, a pair of horns, and a bite. They speak their own lan¬guage and that of gargoyles. They are 20% likely to be foundwith the latter, either as leaders or masters,
Genies come from the elemental planes- There- among their ownkind, they are have their own societies. Genies are sometimes en¬countered on the Prime Material plane and are often summonedspecifically to perform some service for a powerful wizard orpriest. All genies can travel to any of the elemental planes, as wellas the Prime Materia! and Astral planes, Genies speak their owntongue and that of any intelligent beings they meet through a lim¬ited form of telepathy,The djinn are genies from the elemental plane of Air. It should benoted that djinn'' is the plural form of their name, while ' djinni 'is the singular.Combat: The djinn's magical nature enables them to do any ofthe following once per day; create nufnhous food for 2d6 per¬sons and create water or create wine for 2d6 persons* create 50 ftgoods (up to 16 cubic feet) or create wooden items (up to 9 cubicfeet) of a permanent nature; create metal, up to 100 poundsweight with a short life span (the harder the metal the less time itlasts; gold has about a 24 hour existence while djinni steel lastsonly one hour); create illusion as a 20th-level wizard with bothvisible and audible components, which last without concentra¬tion until touched or magically dispelled; use invisibility, gaseousform, or wind walk.Once per day the genie can create a whirlwind, which the itcan ride or even direct at will from a distance. The whirlwind is acone-shaped spiral, measuring up to 10 feet across at its base, 40feet across at the top. and up to 70 feet in height (the djinnichooses the dimensions). Its maximum speed is 18, with maneu¬verability class A, The whirlwind's base must touch water or asolid surface, or it will dissolve. It takes a full turn for the whirl¬wind to form or dissolve. During that time, the whirlwind inflictsno damage and has no other effect. The whirlwind lasts as long asthe djinni concentrates on It, moving at the creature's whim,If the whirlwind strikes a non-aerial creature with fewer than 2Hit Dice, the creature must make a saving throw vs. breathweapon for each round of contact with the whirlwind, or beswept off its feet, battered, and killed. Hardier beings, as well asaerial or airborne creatures, take 2d6 points of damage per roundof contact with the whirlwind.A djinni can ride its whirlwind and even take along passengers,who (like the djinni) suffer no damage from the buffeting winds.The whirlwind can carry the genie and up to six man-sized orthree genie-sized companions.Airborne creatures or attacks receive a -1 penalty to attackand damage rolls against a djinni, who also receives a +4 bonusto saving throws against gas attacks and air-based spells.Djinn are nearly impossible to capture bv physical means; adjinni who is overmatched in combat usually takes to flight anduses its whirlwind to buffet those who follow-. Genies are openlycontemptuous of those life forms that need wings or artificialmeans to fly and use illusion and invisibility against such ene¬mies. Thus, the capture and enslavement of djinn is better re¬solved by the DM on a case-by-case basis. It is worth noting,however, that a good master will typically encourage a djinni toadditional effort and higher performance, while a demandingand cruel master encourages the opposite,Djinn are able to carry up to 600 pounds, on foot or flying,without tiring. They can carry double that for a short time: threeturns if on foot, or one turn if flying. For each 100 pounds belowthe maximum, add one turn to the time a djinni may walk or flybefore tiring. A fatigued djinni must rest for an hour before per¬forming any additional strenuous activity.Habitat Society; The djinn s native land is the elemental plane ofAir, where they live on floating islands of earth and rock, any¬where from 1,000 yards to several miles across. They arecrammed with buildings, courtyards, gardens, fountains, andsculptures made of elemental flames. In a typical djinn landholdthere are 3dl0 djinn of various ages and powers, as wdl as IdIGjann and IdlO elemental creatures of low intelligence- All areruled by the local sheik, a djinn of maximum hit points.The social structure of Djinn society is based on rule by a ca-liph, served by various nobles and officials (viziers, beys, emirs,sheiks, sheriffs, and maliks). A caliph rules all the djinn estateswithin two days travel, and is advised by six viziers who helpmaintain the balance of the landholdings.If a landhold is attacked by a large force, a messenger (usuallythe youngest djinni) is sent to the next landhold, which sends aidand dispatches two more messengers to warn the next landholds;in this fashion the entire nation is warned.Some djinn (1 %) are "noble" and are able to grant three wishesto their masters. Noble djinn perform no other services and,upon granting the third wish are freed of their servitude. Nobledjinn areas strong as efreet, with 10 Hit Dice, They strike for3dSpoints of damage, and the whirlwinds they create cause 3d6 hitpoints of damage,A dao is a genie from the elemental plane of Earth, While they aregenerally found on that plane (though even there they are un¬common), the dao love to come to the Prime Material plane towork evil. Dao speak all of the languages of the genies, as well asCommon and the tongue of earth elemental.Combat: The dao s magical abilities enable them to use any of thefollowing magical powers, one at a time, once each per day:change self, detect good detect magic, gaseous form, invisibilitymisdirection r passwaU. spectral force , and of stone. Theycan also fulfill another's limited wish (in a perverse way) onceeach day, Dao can use rock to mud three times per day and dig sixtimes per day. Dao perform all magic as IStMevel spellcasters.A dao can carry up to 500 pounds without tiring. Doubleweight will cause tiring in three turns, but for every 100 poundsof weight under 1,000, the dao may add one turn to the durationof its carrying ability. After tiring, a dao must rest for one hour.Dao can move through earth (not worked stone) at a burrowingspeed of 6, They cannot take living beings with them, but cansafely carry inanimate objects.Dao are not harmed by earth-related spells, but holy water hastwice its normal effect upon these monsters,Habita ('Society: The dao dwell in the Great Dismal Delve ontheir own plane and in deep caves, caverns, or cysts on the PrimeMaterial plane. Dao settle pockets of elemental matter on theirown plane, bending those pockets to their will and desire. A daomazework contains 4dl0 dao, as well asSdlO elemental and non-elemental slaves. Each mazework is ruled by an ataman or het¬man who is advised by a seneschal. The loyalty of a mazeworksataman to the Great Dismal Delve is always questionable, butthe seneschals are chosen by the khan of the dao, and their loyal¬ty is to him alone.The khan of the dao lives at the center of the great mazeworkcalled the Great Dismal Delve. The land within the delve is saidto be larger than most Prime Material continents. The Great Dis¬mal Delve is linked to all manner of elemental pockets, so thekhan can call forth whatever powers he needs. The population ofdao in the delve is unknown, as is the number of slaves that con¬stantly work the tunnels and clear away damage caused by thequakes w T hich frequently shake it.Dao dislike servitude as much as efreet and are even moreprone to malice and revenge than their fiery counterparts,Ecologvi The dao manage a thriving business of trade, driven bya desire for more power and access to predous gems. High ontheir list of hatreds are most other genies (except efreet, withwhom they trade worked metals for minerals). They also havelittle use for other elemental creatures: the dao value these only ifthey can exploit them in some fashion.The efreet (singular; efreeti) are genies from the elemental planeof Fire. They are enemies of the djinn and attack them wheneverthey are encountered, A properly summoned or captured efreeti
can be forced to serve for a maximum of 1,001 days, or it can bemade to fulfill three wishes. Efreet are not willing servants andseek to pervert the intent of their masters by adhering to the letterof their commands.The efreet are said to be made of basalt, bronze, and solidFlames. They are massive, solid creatures.Combat: An efreeti is able to do the following once per day:grant up to three wishes; use invisibility, gaseous form , detectmagic , enlarge, polymorph self, and wall of fire; create an Ifiu-siorf with both visual and audio components which will last with¬out concentration until magically dispelled or touched. Anefreeti can also produce flame or use pyrotechnics at will. Efreetare immune to normal fire^based attacks, and even an attackwith magical fire suffers a — 1 1 penalty on all attack and damagerolls.Efreet can carry up to 750 pounds on foot or flying, withouttiring. They can also carry double weight for a limited time: threeturns on foot or one turn aloft. For each 150 pounds of weightunder 1500, add one turn to either walking or flying time permit¬ted, After tiring, the efreeti must rest for one hour.Habitat/Society Efreet are infamous for their haEred of servitude,desire for revenge, cruel nature, and ability to beguile and mis¬lead. The efreet s primary home is their great citadel, the fabfedCity of Brass, but there are many other efreet outposts through¬out the plane of Fire.An efreet outpost is a haven for 4dl0 efreet and is run as a mili¬tary station to watch or harass others in the plane. These out¬posts are run by a malik or vali of maximum normal hit points.There is a 10% chance that the outpost is also providing a tempo¬rary home for ld4 jann or ld4 dao (the only other genies efreettolerate!. Outpost forces are usually directed against incursionsfrom the elemental plane of Air. but they can be directed againstany travelers deemed suitable for threats, robbery, and abuse,Efreet are neutral, but tend toward organized evil. They areruled by a grand sultan who makes his home in the City of BrassHe is advised by a variety of beys, amirs, and maliks concerningactions within the plane, and by six great pashas who deal withefreet business on the Prime Material plane.The City of Brass is a huge citadel that is home to the majorityof efreet. It hovers in the hot regions of the plane and is oftenbordered by seas of magma and lakes of glowing lava. The citysits upon a hemisphere of golden, glowing brass some 40 milesacross. From the upper towers rise the minarets of the great bas¬tion of the Sultan s Palace, Vast riches are said to be in the palaceof the sultan. The city has an efreet population that far outnum¬bers the great cities of the Prime Material plane. The sultanwields the might of a Greater Power, while many of his advisorsare akin to Lesser Powers and Demi-Powers.Ecology: Fire elemental* tend to avoid the efreet, whom they feelare oppressive and opportunistic. Djinn hate them, and therehave been numerous djinn-efreet dashes, Efreet view most othercreatures either as enemies or servants, a view that does not en¬dear them to other genies,The marids are said to be bom of the ocean, having currents formuscles and pearls for teeth. These genies from the elementalplane of Water are the most powerful of all genies. They are alsothe most individualistic and chaotic of the elemental races, andonly rarely deign to serve others,On their own plane they are rare; marids travel so seldom tothe Prime Material plane that many consider marids to he crea¬tures of legend only.Combat: Marids perform as 26th-level spellcasters, and can useany of the following magical powers, one at a time, twice eachper day: detect evil, detect good, detect invisibility, detect magic,invisibility, liquid form (similar to gaseous form), polymorphself r and purify water. Marids can use any of the following up toseven times per day: gaseous form, lower water, part water wallof fog, or water breathing (used on others, lasting up to one fullday). Once per year a marid can use alter reality,Marids can always create -water , which they may direct in apowerful jet up to 60 yards long. Victims struck by the jet takeld6 points of damage and must make a successful saving throwvs, breath weapon or be blinded for ld6 rounds, Marids alsohave the innate ability to water walk (as the ring),A marid can carry 1,000 pounds. Double weight causes tiringin three turns. For every 200 pounds under 2,000, add one turn tothe time the marid can carry before tiring, A tired marid mustrest for one hour.Marids swim, breathe water, are at home at any depth, andhave infravision. They are not harmed by water-based spells.Cold-based spells grant them a + 2 bonus to saving throws and—2 to each die of damage. Fire inflicts +1 per die of damage,with saving throws at a -1 penalty. Steam does not harm them,Habitat/Society: Marids live in a loose empire ruled by a padisha.Each marid lays some claim to royalty; they are all shahs, ata-begs, beglerbegs, or mufti at the very least. There have oftenbeen several simultaneous "single true heirs" to the padisha'sthrone through the eons,A marid household numbers 2dl0 and is located around loose¬ly grouped elemental pockets containing the necessities for maridlife. Larger groups of marids gather for hunts and tournaments,where individual effort is heavily emphasized.Marids are champion tale-tellers, although most of their talesemphasize their own prowess, and belittle others. When commu*nicating with a marid, one must attempt to keep the conversationgoing without continual digression for one tale or another, w T hilenot offending the marid. Marids consider it a capital offense for alesser being to offend a marid.Marids are both fiercely independent and extremely egoistical.They are not easily forced to perform actions; even Lf convincedthrough flattery and bribery to obey, they often stray from theirintended course to seek some other adventure that promisesgreater glory, or to instruct lesser creatures on the glories of themarids. Most mages skilled in summoning and conjuration con¬sider marids to be more trouble than they are worth, which ac¬counts for the great lack of items of marid control (as opposed tothose affecting efreet and djinn),Marids can travel the Ethereal plane, in addition to thoseplanes to which all genies can travel.Ecology: Marids tolerate their genie relatives, putting up withjann and djinn like poor cousins, while they have an aversion toefreet and dao. Their attitude toward the rest of the world is simi¬lar; most creatures from other planes are considered lesser be¬ings, not fit to be bothered with unless one lands in the feast hallat an inopportune time,The jann are the weakest of the elemental humanoids known col¬lectively as genies, Jann are formed out of all four elements andmust therefore spend most of their time on the Prime Materialplane. In addition to speaking Common and all the languages ofgenies, jann can speak with animals.Combat: lann often wear chain mail armor (60% chance), givingthem an effective AC of 2, They typically use great scimitarswhich inflict 2d8 damage to small and medium creatures, and4d4 points of damage to larger opponents. They also use com¬posite long bows. Male jann have exceptional Strength scores;roll percentile dice for their Strengths, For female jann, roll per¬centile dice and subtract SO: anything above 0 indicates percent¬age Strength equal to that number, while anything belowindicates 18 Strength,Jann can use one the following magical powers each round:enlarge or reduce twice each per day. invisibility three times perday; create food and water once per day as a 7th-level priest: andethereahiess (as the armor) once per day for a maximum of onehour. lann perform at 12th-level ability, except as noted.Habitat. Society Jann favor forlorn deserts and hidden oases,where they have both privacy and safety, lann society is veryopen, and males and females are regarded as equals. A tribe ismade up of ld20 + 10 individuals and is ruled by a sheik and oneor two viziers. Exceptionally powerful sheiks are given the title ofamir and in times of need they gather and command large forcesof jann (and sometimes allied humans).Many jann tribes are nomadic, traveling with flocks of camels,goats, or sheep from oasis to oasis. These itinerant jann appearhuman m every respect, and are often mistaken for them, unlessthey are attacked. Jann are strong and courageous, and they donot take kindly to insult or injury, The territory of a jann tribecan extend hundreds of miles in any direction.While traveling, male jann Uve in large, colorful tents withtheir wives and married male children, and their families. Mar¬ried daughters move away to Uve with their new husbands.When a family eventually grows large enough that it can no long¬er reside comfortably in the tent, a new tent is built, and a sontakes his wife and family with him to this new dwelling. At per¬manent oases, the jann live not only in tents, but also in elegantlystyled structures built from materials broughL from any of theelemental planesJann are able to dwell in air, earth, fire, or water environmentsfor up to 48 hours. This includes the elemental planes, to whichany janni can travel, even taking up to six individuals along ifthose others hold hands in a circle with the janni. Failure to re¬turn to the Prime Material plane within 48 hours inflicts 1 pointof damage per additional hour on the jann, until the jann dies orreturns to the Prime Material plane. Travel to another elementalplane is possible, without damage, providing at least tw r o daysare spent on the Prime Material plane immediately prior to thetravel.Ecology: Jann are suspicious of humans, dislike demihumans,and detest humanoids, Jann accept djinn, but shun dao, efreet,and marids. They sometimes befriend humans or work withthem for a desired reward, like potent magical items.One ethic the jann share with other nomads is the cultural de¬mand for treating guests with honor and respect. Innocent visi¬tors {including humans) are treated hospitably during their stay,but some day might be expected to return the favor.Jann Leaders: Jann leaders have 17-18 Intelligence, and 10% have19 Strength. Sheiks have up to & Hit Dice, amirs up to 9. Viziershave 17-20 Intelligence and the following magical powers, eachusable three times per day at 12th-levd spellcasting ability: augu¬ry, detect magic, and divination.Ghosts are the spirits of humans who were either so greatly evilin life or whose deaths were so unusually emotional they havebeen cursed with the gift of undcad status. Thus, they roamabout at night or in places of darkness. These spirits hate good¬ness and life, hungering to draw the living essences from theliving.Combat: As ghosts are non-corporeal (ethereal), they are usu¬ally encountered only by creatures in a like state, although theycan be seen by non-ethereal creatures. The supernatural power ofa ghost is such, however, that the mere sight of one causes anyhumanoid being to age 10 years and flee m panic for 2-12 (2d6)turns unless a saving throw versus spells is made. Priests above6th level are immune to this effect and all other humanoids above8th level may add +2 to their saving throws.Any creatures within 60 yards of a ghost is subject to attack bya tnagic jar. If the ghost fails to magic jar its chosen victim, itwill then semi-materialize in order to attack by touch (in whichcase the ghost is Armor Class 0). Semi-materialized ghosts can bestruck only by silver (half damage) or magical weapons (fulldamage). If they strike an opponent it ages him IQ-40 Ud4xlO)years. Note that ghosts can be attacked with spells only by crea¬tures who are in an ethereal state. Any human or demi-humankilled by a ghost is drained of its life essence and is forever dead.If the ghost Fails to become semi-material It can only be com¬batted by another In the Ethereal plane (in which case the ghosthas an Armor Gass of 8).Ghosts can be turned by denes after reaching 7th level and canbe damaged by holy water while in their semi-material form.Habitat-Society: In most cases, a ghost is confined to a smallphysical area which the ghost haunts. Those who have heardstories of a haunted area can thus attempt to avoid it tor theirown safety.A ghost often has a specific purpose in its haunting, sometimestrying to "get even" for something that happened during theghost's life. Thus a woman who was jilted by a lover, and thencommitted suicide, might become a ghost and haunt the couple'ssecret trysting place. Similarly, a man who failed at businessmight appear each night at his storefront or, perhaps, at that of aformer competitor.Another common reason for art individual to become a ghost jsthe denial of a proper burial, A ghost might inhabit the area nearits body, waiting for a passerby to promise to bury the remains.The ghost, in its resentment toward all life, becomes an evil crea¬ture intent on destruction and suffering.In rare circumstances, more than one ghost will haunt the samelocation. The classic example of this is the haunted ship, a vessellost at sea, now r ethereal and crewed entirely by ghosts. Theseships are most often encountered in the presence of St. Elmo'sfire, an electrical discharge that causes mysterious lights to ap¬pear in the rigging of a ship.In many cases, a ghost can be overcome by those who might beno match for it in combat simply by setting right whatever eventsled to the attainment of the ghost's undead status. For example, ayoung woman who was betrayed and murdered by someone whopretended to love her might be freed from her curse if the cadwere humiliated and ruined, In many cases, however, a ghost'srevenge will be far more demanding, often ending in the death ofthe offender.Ecology: The dreadful fear caused by the ghost, which ages avictim 10 years, is not well understood by the common man.who often ascribes it to the fact that a ghost is "dead . 1 ' If this werethe case, then certainly skeletons and zombies would have thesame effect, which they do not.Common folklore further confuses this fact by relating detailsof the ghost s physical form: the classic example of which is theheadless horseman, thought by many to be particularly frighten¬ing simply because he had no head. Under this belief, one couldface a ghost if only one had the courage to stand up to him. Sucha mistaken impression has cost many lives over the years. Actu¬ally, the fear is caused by the supernatural power of the ghost,and has nothing whatsoever to do with courage.
Ghouls are undead creatures, once human, who now feed on theflesh of corpses. Although the change from human to ghoul hasderanged and destroyed their minds, ghouls have a terrible cun¬ning which enables them to hunt their prey most effectively,Ghouls are vaguely recognizable as once having been human,but have become horribly disfigured by their change to ghouls.The tongue becomes long and tough for licking marrow fromcracked bones, the teeth become sharp and elongated, and thenails grow strong and sharp like claws.Combat: Ghouls attack by clawing with their filthy nails and bit¬ing with their fangs. Their touch causes humans (including dwarves,gnomes, half-elves, and halflings, but excluding elves} to becamerigid unless a saving throw versus paxalyzation is successful. Thisparalysis lasts for 3-6 (2 + ld6) rounds or until negated by a priest.Any human or demi-human (except elves) killed by a ghoulishattack will become a ghoul unless blessed (or blessed and thenresurrected). Obviously, this is also avoided if the victim is de¬voured by the ghouls. Ghoul packs always attack without fear.These creatures are subject to ad attack forms except sleep andcharm spells. They can be turned by priests of any level. Themagic circle of protection from evil actually keeps ghouls com¬pletely at bay,HabitatSocfety: Ghouls and ghasts are most frequently en¬countered around graveyards, where they can find plenty ofcorpses on which to feed.Ecology: Ghouls (and ghasts, as described later) delight in re¬volting and loathsome things—from which we draw our adjec¬tives w ghoulish" and "ghastly'’The lacedon is a marine form of the ghoul. Lacedons are some¬times found near marine ghosts, particularly ghost ships. Lace¬dons are less common than ghouls because of the fewer corpsesavailable for them to feed on. but they can often be foundswarming around recent shipwrecks in rivers, lakes, and oceans.These creatures are so like ghouls as to be completely indistin¬guishable from them, and they are usually found only with apack of ghouls. When a pack of ghouls and ghasts attacks it willquickly become evident that ghasts are present, tor they exude acarrion stench in a 10 r radius which causes retching and nauseaunless a saving throw versus poison is made. Those failing tomake this save will attack at a penalty of -2.Worse, the ghast shares the ghoulish ability to paralyzation,and their attack is so potent that it will even affect elves. Paraly¬sis caused by a ghast lasts for 5-10 (4 + ld6) rounds or until ne¬gated by a priest s remove paralysis spell.Ghasts, like ghouls, are undead class and thus sleep and charmspells do not affect them. Though they can be struck by any sort ofweapon, cold iron inflicts double normal damage. Clerics can turnthem beginning at 2nd level The circle of protection from evil doesnot keep them at bay unless it is used in conjunction with cold iron(such as a circle of powdered iron or an iron ring}.
InfantJuvenile. -3Juvenile. -2Juvenile, -ISpell caster. 1stSpell caster, 2ndSpell caster. 3rdSpell caster 4 th1-10. or by weapon (6-24 +11)Hurling rocks for 2-24Surprised only on a 1NilCloud giants consider themselves above all other giants, savestorm giants, whom they consider equals. They are creative, ap¬preciate fine things, and are master strategists in battle.Cloud giants have muscular human builds and handsome,well-defined features. The typical cloud giant is 24 feet tali andweighs 11,500 pounds. Female cloud giants can be 1 to 2 feetshorter and 1,000 to 2,000 pounds lighter. Cloud giants' skinranges in color from a milky-white tinged with blue to a light skyblue. Their hair is silvery white or brass and their eyes are aniridescent blue. Cloud giants can live to be 400 years old.A doud giants natural Armor Class is 0, Although they willwear no armor, these giants prize magical protection devices, andone in 20 will have such a device. Cloud giants dress in dothingmade of the finest materials available and wear jewelry, Many ofthe giants consider their appearance an indication of their sta¬tion; the more jewelry and the better the clothes, the more impor¬tant the giant, Cloud giants also appreciate music, and themajority of giants are able to play one or more instruments (theirfavorite is the harp). Unlike most other giant races, cloud giantsleave their treasure in their lairs, carrying with them only food,throwing rocks. 10-100 UOd'lO) coins, and a musical instrument.Cloud giants speak their own tongue and the language of allother giants. In addition, 60% of all doud giants speak common.Combat; Cloud giants fight in well-organized units, using care¬fully developed battle plans. They prefer to fight from a positionabove their opponents, A favorite tactic is to circle the enemy,barraging them with rocks while the giants with magical abilitiesassault them with spells. Ooud giants can hurl rocks to a maxi¬mum of 240 yards, causing 2-24 (2dl2) points of damage. Theirhuge momingstars do 6-24 (6d4) +11 points of damage, threetimes normal (man-sized) damage plus their strength bonus. Onein 10 doud giants will have a magical weapon.Habitat/Society: Cloud giants live in small clans ot no morethan six giants. However, these clans know the location of 1-8other clans and will band together with some of these dans forcelebrations, battles, or to trade. These joined dans will recog¬nize one among them to be their leader—this is usually an olderdoud giant who has magical abilities. One in 10 cloud giants willhave spells equivalent to a 4th level wizard, and one in 20 cloudgiants will be the equivalent of a 4th level priest. A cloud giantcannot have both priest and wizard abilities.If encountered in a lair, half will be immature giants. To deter¬mine a giant's maturity, roll ld4. A roll of 4 indicates an infantwith no combat ability and hit points of ogre. Rolls of 1-3 indi¬cate older progeny with hit dice, damage, and "to hit" rolls equalto that of a fire giant,The majority of doud giants live on cloud-covered mountainpeaks in temperate and sub-tropical areas. These giants maketheir lairs in crude castles. Only 10% of good cloud giants live incastles on enchanted clouds. All giants dwelling there are able tolevitate their own weight plus 2,000 pounds three times a day,create a fog cloud three times a day. and create a wall of fog oncea day. These abilities are performed as a 6th level wizard.There is a 60% chance a doud giant mountain lair will beguarded by 1-4 spotted Hons, 2-5 (Id4 + 1) owl bears, or 2-5(ld4 +1) griffons (1-2 wyvems for evil doud giants)* In addition,there is a 50% chance the Jairs of evil cloud giants will contain 1-20 human and demi-human slaves. There is an 80% chance that acloud island lair will be guarded by 2-5 Od4 + I) griffons, 2^8(2d4) hippogriffs, or 2-5 (ld4 + 1) giant eagles.Cloud lairs are fantastic places with giant-sized gardens of fruittrees. According to legend, some giants mine their doud islandsfor small chunks of the purest silver.Ecology: Cloud giants prefer food Lhat h carefully preparedwith spkes and sauces, and they relish fine, aged wines.Good doud giants trade with human and demi-human com¬munities for food, wine, jewelry, and doth. Some doud giantdans will establish good relations with such communities* andwill come to the communities' aid if they are endangered. Evildoud giants raid human and demi-human communities to getvdiat they want.
A diminutive relative of true giants, cyclopskin are single-eyedgiants that live alone or tn small bands.The typical cyclopskin weighs around 350 pounds, and stands7Vi feet talk A single large, red eye dominates the center of itsforehead. Shaggy black or dull, deep blue hair falls in a tangledmass about its head and shoulders, its skin tone varies from rud¬dy brown to muddy yellow, and its voice is rough and sharp.Cyclopskin commonly dress in ragged animal hides and sandals.They smell of equal parts dirt and dung.Combat; Cyclopskin are armed with either a club or a bardiche*Each will also carry a heavy hurling spear (Ido damage) and asling of great size (ld6 damage). They never wear armor or useshields, tor their tough hide gives them ample protection frommost attacks.Cyclopskin do not bother with strategy or tactics in combat. Iftheir opponents are out of reach, they use slings or hurl heavyspears* They can not throw boulders like their larger cousins.Since the single eye of the cyclopskin gives them poor depth per¬ception, they suffer a -2 penalty to all missile attack rolls, but notto damage. If the opponents are close, the cyclopskin rush in tofight with their dubs or bardiches.Habitat Society: The single-eyed humanoids shy away from or¬ganized settlements. If left alone, they tend to leave armedgroups alone, though they are not above attacking a much weak¬er Force if they stumble across one. Cyclopskin have no regardfor any form of life other than themselves. Captives are eitherenslaved or eaten* This doesn't happen very often, since the cy-dopskin tend to live in remote rocky places. They rarely wandermore than 10 miles from their caves.Being poor hunters, most cydopskin clans keep small herds ofgoats or sheep. Some clans are nomadic, while others stay put intheir caves Each spring, regional dans meet to exchange goodsand slaves and to select mates. On rare occasions a charismaticcyclopskin will arise and bring together several dans to form awandering tribe. The largest known tribe numbered around SOfighting cydopskin. Such a band will aggressively raid outlyingareas with a boldness uncommon in a single dan. All group deci¬sions are made by the strongest and toughest cydopskin in thegroup, usually through intimidation This in turn leads to brawlsand fist fights. There are no rules in such fights, and they can leadto permanent injury or death For the loser.A cydopskin cave is sealed with boulders and there is but oneentrance* Inside, if size permits, there will be wooden pens tohouse both animals and slaves. The pens always have roofs ofeither wooden bars or the natural cave ceiling.At night, a large boulder or stout wooden gate is placed at theentrance of the cave to protect the cyclopskin from predators*There are no interior fire pits, since cyclopskin use fire infre¬quently, and then only outside their lairs. Any cydopskin trea¬sure will be kept in a sack in the caveEcology; Cydopskin can survive on almost any animal or plantdiet. They enjoy meal of all sorts and prize it above vegetablefoods. While they live off the land, they do not live with it. Theyhave absolutely no sanitary practices, and rarely even cook theirmeals. They take no care to preserve their environment whilehunting, and are considered to be one of the easiest creatures oftheir size to track.The life of a cydopskin is hazardous, and hence they have ashort life expectancy. Besides human adventurers, there are manypredators* such as tigers, giants, wyvems, and trolls, that are notabove attacking a small group of these giants. However moun¬tain dwarves actually go out of their way to hunt cydopskin,receiving the dwarven bonus against giants,Cyclops: These larger versions of their slightly more commoncousins are usually found in the extreme wilds or on isolated is¬lands. where they scratch out a meager existence by shepherdingtheir flocks of giant sheep. Cyclopes can hurl boulders up to 150yards away, inflicting 410 points of damage*
1-10 or by weapon (2-12 +7)Hurling spearsCamouflageDesert giants were once numerous in the scrub plains and des¬erts of the Land of Fate, but they have fallen victim to a divinecurse which transforms them slowly but inexorably into stone.They always wander the land m the company of their cattle andtheir mounts. Their great civilization has long since vanishedunder the sands.The weathered and craggy faces of the desert giants are scoredwith wrinkles. Even the youngest of desert giants are somewhatwrinkled, though this is not visible in the women, as they wearthe veil. The dark hair and swarthy skin of the desert giantsmake their blue eyes all the more remarkable. However, it isconsidered a dear sign of impending fossihzation when the eyesof a desert giant turn from blue to brown. The typical desertgiant is IT tall and weighs 7,000 pounds, though fossilizing gi¬ants may weigh twice that. Desert giants may live to be 400years old.Combat; Desert giants fight mounted when they can, thoughsteeds of a size to suit them are rare. Battle mounts include gi¬gantic lizards, enormous insects, huge undead horses of shiftingbone, and even rots. In the past, some desert giants took serviceas bodyguards and mercenaries with the most powerlul of sul¬tans, The sight of a squad of desert giants wheeling about inpreparation fora charge has caused more than one desert legionto break and run.Desert giants do not hurl rocks. Indeed, they wander manyareas where there is often no ready supply of boulders, and car¬rying such heavy objects would tire even the strongest nomadicgiant. However, they do make large throwing spears from woodthey find when they pass near jungle lands. These spears arekept and cherished as heirlooms over generations. The spearshave a range of 3 .'6/9 and cause 2-12 + 7 points of damage. Des¬ert giant chieftains sometimes carry great set mi Lars given totheir ancestors for outstanding military service. These weaponscause 2-1 1 + 7 when wielded by anyone with a Strength of 19 orbetter. On occasion, a desert giant wilt attack with one of itshuge fists, causing 1-10 points damage on a successful attackSome desert giants are gifted with the ability to call back theirancestors from the stones; they are called sand-shifters becauseof the way the summoned giants throw aside the sands whenthey rise again. Sand-shifters are not priests or mages; they haveno other special spell abilities. One in every 10 desert giants canbring back giants who have assumed the form of stone and cancommand them to fight once more. Once per week* a desert gi¬ant can summon 1-6 giants from the rocks for 2-12 turns; thesummoning takes one turn. These giants crumble back to rockand powder when slain. Desert giant children gifted this waycan summon 2-20 stony mounts for their elders to ride into bat¬tle. Adult sand-shifters can summon 3-30 mounts instead of 1-6giants if they so choose.Desert giants' skin is so similar to sand and rock that they cancamouflage themselves very effectively, if given one turn to pre¬pare, This ability allows them to ambush foes and prey alike.(Desert giants who lose their herds often use this ability to be¬come effective bandits, and the numbers of these gigantic brig¬ands have increased as the race dwindles,) A giant socamouflaged increases chances of a surprise attack to 1-4 on adl0 and decreases the chance of being seen by search parties orsoldiers to I in 10,Habitat/Society: Desert giants are nomadic herdsmen and arerarely found far from their herds. Though they are responsibletor stripping entire river valleys bare in fertile areas, they do notreimburse farmers or herdsmen on the edge of those territoriesfor any damage they might do. They see the lands as theirs forthe taking, and they make no apology for overgrazing or evenfor grazing their herds on crops. Few- sultanates attempt to forcethem off cropland; most attempt to lure the desert giants awaywith promises of employment as mercenaries. Some will prom¬ise rich gifts of salt* cloth, spices, and metal if only the desertgiants will return to the empty quarters of the desert.Ecology: Desert giants wander hundreds of miles following therains with their herds. When the rains fail, the scrub withers,and the herds and their giants starve. At these times youngmales among the desert giants may take up mercenary work anduse the money they obtain to support the entire tribe. If adrought goes on for years, more and more giants are driven intothe cities, though their absolute numbers are still tiny comparedto the numbers of humans and other smaller races.
Ettins. or two-headed giants, as they are often called, are viciousand unpredictable hunters that stalk by night and eat any meatthey can catch.An ettin at first appears to be a stone or hill giant with twoheads. On closer inspection, however, the creature’s vast differ¬ences from the relatively civilized giant races become readily ap¬parent. An ettin has pink to brownish skin, though it appears tobe covered in a dark brown hide. This is because an ettin neverbathes if it can help it, and is therefore usually encrusted with athick layer of dirt and grime, Its skin is thick, giving the ettin itslow Armor Class, An ettins hair is long, stringy, and unkempt;its teeth are large, yellowing, and often rotten. The ettin's facialfeatures strongly resemble those of an ore—large watery eyes,turned-up piggish snout, and large mouth.An ettin’s right head is always the dominant one, and the rightarm and leg will likely appear slightly more muscular and well-developed than the left. An ettin wears only rough, untreatedskins, which are dirty and unwashed. Obviously ettins smellvery bad. due to their complete lack of grooming habits—goodor bad,Ettins do not have a true language of their own, Instead, theyspeak a mish-mash of ore. goblin, giant dialects, and the align¬ment tongue of chaotic evil creatures. Any adventurer whospeaks orrish can understand 50% of what an ettin says.Combat: Having two heads Is definitely an advantage lor theettins, as one is always alert, watching for danger and potentialfood- This means that an ettin is surprised only on the roll of a 1on IdlO. An ettin also has infra vision up to 90 feet, which en¬ables it to hunt and fight effectively in the dark.Though ettins have a low intelligence, they are cunning fight¬ers, They prefer to ambush their victims rather than charge into astraight fight, but once the battle has started, ettins usually fightfuriously until all enemies are dead, or the battle turns againstthem. Ettins do not retreat easily only doing so if victory is im¬possible.In combat, an ettin has two attacks, Because each of its twoheads controls an arm. an ettin does not suffer an attack roll pen¬alty for attacking with both arms. An ettin always attacks withtwo large dubs, often covered with spikes. Using these weapons.the ettin causes 2d8 points of damage with its left arm, and 3d6points of damage with its right. If the ettin is disarmed or unableto use a weapon, it attacks empty-handed, inflicting IdlO pointsof damage with its left fist and 2d6 points with its right.HabitotSodety; Ettins like to establish their lairs in remote,rocky areas. They dwell in dark, underground caves that stink ofdecaying food and offal. Ettins are generally solitary, and matedpairs only stay together for a few months after a young ettin isbom to them. Young ettins mature very quickly and within eightto ten months after they are bom, they are self-sufficient enoughto go off on their own.On rare occasions, however, a particularly strong ettin maygather a small group of Id4 ettins together. This small band ofeLtins stays together only as long as the leader remains alive andundefeated In battle. Any major defeat shatters the leaders holdover the band, and they each go their separate ways,Ettins collect treasure only because it can buy them the servicesof goblins or ores. These creatures sometimes serve ettins bybuilding traps around their lairs, or helping to fight off a power¬ful opponent, Ettins have also been known to occasionally keep1-2 cave bears in the area of their lairs.The sloppy caves of ettins are a haven for parasites and ver¬min, and it isn't unusual for the ettins themselves to be infectedwith various parasitic diseases. Adventurers rummaging throughettin lairs for valuables will find the task disgusting, if not dan¬gerous.Ecology: Because ettin society is so primitive, they produce lit¬tle of any value to civilized creatures. Ettins tolerate the presenceof other creatures, like ores, in the area of their lair if they can beuseful tn some way. Otherwise, ettins tend to be violently isola¬tionist, crushing trespassers without question.
Of all the giant-kin, the firbolg is the most powerful, due to natu¬ral intelligence and considerable magjcal power.Firbolgs appear to be normal humans, except that they areover 10 feet tall and weigh over 800 pounds. They wear their hairlong and keep great, thick beards. Their skin is a normal fleshypink, with any shade of hair color, although blonde and red aremost common. The flesh and skin of firbolgs are unusually denseand tough. Their voices are a smooth, deep bass, thick with roll¬ing consonants.Combat: Firbolgs can use any large size weapons; they disdainthe use of armor or shields. Of manmade weapons, they prefertwo-handed swords and halberds, both of which they may use inone hand without penalty. Weapons of their own make are dou¬ble size equivalents of human weapons, for which they get aStrength bonus (19 Strength +7 damage). However, when usedwith both hands, these huge weapons inflict double their normaldamage, plus the Strength bonus.If a firbolg has one hand free, it can bat away up to two mis¬siles per round. Large missiles, such as boulders, or those withlong shafts, such as javelins and spears, can be caught if desired.A catch or bat is successful 75% of the time (6 or better on ld20) .A caught weapon may be thrown at any opponent on the nextround with a ~2 penalty to the attack roll, for using its off hand.All firbolgs have the following magical powers, usable once perday, on any round they are not engaged in melee combat: detectmagic, diminution (as double the potion), foob gold, forget , andalter self. There is a 5% cumulative chance per member of a groupthat one of the firbolgs is a shaman of 1st through 7th level,Firbolgs are cautious and crafty. They have learned to distrustand fear humans and demihumans. If possible they avoid an en¬counter, either by hiding or with deception. If forced to fight,they do so with great strategy, utilizing the terrain and situationto best effect. They operate as a group, not a collection of indi¬viduals , Ten percent of all encounters is a large group of 4d4members en route to an enclave of some sort,Habitat Society: Firbolgs live in remote forests and hills. Thesegiant-kin distrust most other civilized races, and stay well awayfrom them. They keep on even terms with druids and the faeriecreatures, including elves, neither asking nor giving much, butavoiding insult or injury. Strangers are met with caution, fre¬quently in illusionary disguise as one of their own race. They donot attack or kill without reason, but do enjoy pranks,, particu¬larly those that relieve strangers of treasure.Firbolg society is close-knit and centered around the family orclan. Each clan has 4d4 members and frequently a shaman* Thelevel of the shaman is determined by rolling 2d4-I if the DMdoesn't wish to choose it himself. The clans live apart from eachother, existing as gatherers and sometimes nomads, Their homesare huge, single-storey, wooden houses with stout walls and acentral fireplace opening in several directions in the commonroom, When great decisions are needed, the dans involved meetin an enclave. This happens at least once a year at the fall sol¬stice, just to celebrate if nothing else. The shamans preside overthese events, and settle any disputes between clans.Ecology: Firbolgs live off the land and with it. Their homes arebuilt from trees cleared from around the house. The dan doeskeep a field for harvest, but only enough to supplement their di¬et. They trade tasks involving great strength for food, usuallywith other peaceful folk in the forests or hills. The rest of theirfood is obtained by gathering and hunting an area up to 20 milesfrom their homestead. Meat is used in small quantities for mostmeals, although major celebrations always include a large roastof some sort.Although many creatures are capable of killing a firbolg, nonehunt them exclusively. They are stronger than most forest beasts,and intelligent creatures know better than to mess with them.They avoid true giants, except storm giants, and aggressively re¬pel other giant- kin from their lands.
1*0, or by weapon (2-20 +10)Hurling rocks for 2-20 (2dl0)Resistant to fireNil5 h a m an' Wi teh doctor, 3rd level spel Is 10,000Fire giants are brutal, ruthless, and militaristic.They are tall, but squat, resembling huge dwarves. An adultmale is 18 feel tall, has a 12 foot chest, and weighs about 7.500pounds. Fire giants have coal black skin, flaming red or brightorange hair, and prognathous jaws that reveal dirty ivory or yel¬low teeth. They can live to be 350 years old.A fire giant's natural Armor Class is 5. Warriors usually wearbanded mail and round metal helmets (AC -1), They carry theirbelongings in huge sacks. A typical fire giant's sack contains 2-5(ld4 +1) throwing rocks, the giants wealth, a tmderbox, and 3-12 (3d4) common items. Everything they own is battered, filthyand smelly making It difficult to identify valuable items.All fire giants can speak the language of all giants and theirown tongue.Combat: Fire giants are immune to nonmagical fire and heat, aswell as red dragon breath. They are resistant to all types of magi¬cal fire: such attacks inflict -1 hit point per die of damage. Adultfire giants can hurl rocks for 2-20 (2dl0) points of damage. Theirminimum range is 3 yards while their maximum is 200 yards.They can catch similar large missiles 50% of the time. They usu¬ally fight in disciplined groups, throwing rocks until they run outof ammunition or the opponent closes. Fire giants often wait inambush at lava pools or hot springs, hurling heated rocks at vic¬tims for an extra 1 -6 points of damage.Warriors favor huge two-handed swords, A fire giant's over¬sized weapons do double normal (man-sized) damage to all op¬ponents, plus the giants strength bonus. Thus, a fire gianttwo-handed sword does 2-20 (2dI0) +10 points of damage.HabrtatSoriety: Fire giants live in well organized military groups,occupying large castles or caverns, When encountered in their lairthere will be 13-20 (ld8 +12) giants, half of whom will be immaturegiants. To determine a giant's maturity roll ld4, A roll of 4 indicatesan infant with no combat ability and Lhe hit points of an ogre whilerolls of 1-3 indicate older progeny with Hit Dice, damage, and attackTheir lairs are always protected by vigilant watchmen, andsometimes by traps. Fire giants favor deadfalls that can crush in¬truders tor 5-30 (5d6) points of damage, and large crossbow de¬vices that fire one, two, or three huge bolts for 2-16 (2d8) pointsof damage each.Particularly intelligent fire giant leaders will command groupsthree or four times normal size. One who commands 30 or moregiants usually will call himself a king. Kings always will have bet¬ter than normal armor and a magical weapon of +1 to +3.There is a 20% chance that any band of fire giants will have ashaman (80%) or witch doctor (20%), If the group is lead by aking, there is an 80% chance of a spell caster. Fire giant shamansare priests of up to 7th level. A shaman can cast normal or re¬versed spells from the Elemental, Healing, Charm, Protection,Divination, or Combat spheres. Fire giant witch doctors arepriest/wizards of up to 7th '3rd level; they prefer spells that candetect or thwart intruders.Fire giants often capture and tame other creatures as guards.There is a 50% chance that a fire giant lair will contain 1-4 hellhounds. Larger than normal groups check once for every 10 gi¬ants. Bands with 30 or more giants have a additional 30% chanceto have 2-5 (Id4 + 1) trolls, larger groups check once for every 20giants, A kings group has a 20% chance to have 1-2 red dragonsof age category 2-5 Ud4 + 1) in addition to other guards. Fire gi¬ants frequently take captives to hold for ransom or use as slaves.There is a 2S% chance that a lair will contain 1-2 captives, largerbands check once per 10 giants.Ecology: Fire giants live wherever there is a lot of heat. Theyprefer volcanic regions or areas with hot springs. Frequen tly theyshare their lairs with other fire-dwelling creatures such as sala¬manders or fire elemental*,Fire giants prefer to eat meat and bread, they can hunt and killtheir own meat, but raid human and demi-human settlements forgrain, captives, and treasure.
Temperate/Swamps, marshes, boggyforests, and coastal regionsVery rare1-10, or by weapon (3-18 + 11)Rock hurlingSee belowCousins to the cloud giants, these targe rock-hurlers are moreintelligent and stealthy than portrayed in story or song.Fog giants are huge and husky, with tree-trunk sized legs, andover-developed arms muscled by constant throwing games andexercises. They have milk-white skin which aids their naturalability to blend into fog (80% chance) and gives their foes a —5penalty to their surprise rolls when attacking in fog or mist.Their hair is silvery white and flowing, with ample hair on thearms, legs and chest. They grow no facial hair whatsoever.They prefer to wear no armor, counting on their high naturalArmor Class. However, they occasionally wear leather armor(AC -”2), and at least one band wears armor made from whitedragon hides studded with silver. They love massive, ornateclubs made from bleached and polished wood or bone. Fog gi¬ants speak their own tongue and Cloud Giant, and 30% speakCommon.Combat: Fog giants generally hunt in groups of 2-5 males, al¬though they sometimes join with a cloud giant or two to form ahunting party of 3-7. They prefer to attack from cover (fog ismost preferred ). After some ranged rock-hurling to scatter theiropponents, they will charge into melee with fists and swords fly¬ing. Adult fog giants can hurl rocks up to 3-240 yards, inflicting2-20 points of damage to anyone struck. They also have a 45%chance of catching hurled weapons of similar size, but cannotcatch fired weapons such as arrows, bolts, and sling-stones, Inmelee they generally fighL with dubs and fists, though tales ofsword-armed fog giants are common.Because of their keen hearing and highly-developed sense ofsmell, fog giants are seldom surprised { + 2 on surprise rolls).Access to their caves and regular hunting camps are often pro¬tected by deadfalls of rocks or logs, which can be released by acarefully thrown rock at the first sign of an attack against them.Habitat Society: Fog giants are proud of their strength and fight¬ing skills, often playing games when on hunting forays in anattempt to best one another. Their favorite such game is called"copsi" and consists of the giants pairing off to toss larger andlarger boulders to their partners until one of the pairs misses itsthrow.The fog giant families live in caves canyons, or thickets, inthe most inaccessible areas of marsh, swamp, forest, or coast.The men usually hunt in groups, ranging up to a dozen milesfrom their homes. The groups generally are formed of giants ofsimilar alignment.By tradition, a young giant may not mate until he has ob¬tained at least one large ornament of silver. Usually, the younggiant joins with several others in a quest to find one (or acquireenough treasure to buy one).Fog giants do not often mix well with other creatures or races,although they can often be persuaded to perform services for afee, or barter goods with groups of similar alignment. Fog giantswill happily barter goods and services for refined silverTerritorial disputes sometimes flare up between groups, espe¬cially in times of bad hunting. Friendly disputes can sometimesbe resolved by a game of cops* or an arm-wrestling match. Foggiants fighting amongst themselves will generally throw rocksand fist-fight, rather than use swords.Fog giants are fond of all sorts of cooked meats, particularlyhoofed creatures such as horses, cows, deer f elk, and centaur.They often cook meat by building a large fire, then impalingchunks of meat on their swords and holding them over the openFlame. Fog giants prefer fruits and sweets for dessert, and willalso down large quantities of spirits tf available to them. Theydo not distill their own spirits or liquors. They also sometimessmoke fresh milkweed pods in wooden pipes, though the taste istoo bitter for humans and demthumarts to enjoyEcology: Because of their size, fog giants consume a large quan¬tity of food, and require a considerable territory per huntinggroup to support themselves. The giants will often place territo¬rial markers of boulders and logs to define the boundaries be¬tween their hunting territories. They do not look kindly onanyone who tears down or moves these markers. Their regularpathways are hard to hide, and are instead trapped with dead¬falls of rocks and logs to discourage trespassers.
Fomorians are the most hideous, deformed, and wicked of allgiant-kin.The fomorian giants are all grossly deformed behemoths* Eachhas a different set of deformities, which must be determined bythe DM. A partial list of deformations includes misplaced limb,misshapen limb, misplaced facial feature, hunchbacked, bulgingbody part, drooping flesh, body part too big or too small,flapping ears, huge snout, large feet on short legs. Their thick,hairy hides, combined with the pelts and odd metal bits theywear for protection, give an effective AC of 3. They havescattered patches of hair as tough as wire on their pale white skin.Large warts and other growths are scattered across their bodies.There is no single odor associated with fomorians; some smellstrongly due to overactive sweat glands, others have no smell.Their voices are also each different due to their uniquedeformities.Combat: Fomorians use all manner of clubs and other bluntinstruments. Regardless of the weapon, it inflicts double damageplus 8 points for Strength, while their fists alone inflict 2d4+8points of damage. Their deformities prevent them from hurlingboulders as true giants. They work any bits of metal they canfind and scavenge into their clothing, to aid their Armor Class,The typical fomorian is AC 3, while a particularly well-armoredone, or one with a shield, might get an AC as good as 1, but nobetter.Typical fomorian strategy is too sneak up on an opponent andhit him as hard as it can. It works well for them since theiropponents suffer a -2 penalty to their surprise rolls, because thefomorians move slowly and carefully. These giant-kin are onlysurprised on a 1 on the Id 10 surprise roil, because they tend tohave eyes and ears in odd places on their heads. If the fomorianbothers to keep an opponent alive, he is crudely tortured untildead, and then eaten.Habitat Society: Fomorians live in mountain caves, abandonedmines, or other subterranean realms, They rarely modify theirhomes, but adapt to what is already there. These deformed giantswander throughout the underground complex, for almost anydistance, stopped only by hazards they do not want to challenge.A fomorian clan picks a small, (to them) defensible alcove For alair. Their territories are sometimes marked by the bodies of theirenemies. Their treasure consists only of stolen items fromenemies. Pieces of armor are added to their own patchworkprotection. Since they do not care for it, this armor quicklydeteriorates and becomes worthless.Their society is ruled by depravity and wickedness. Thestrongest and cruelest giant rules over all the others within reach,which is usually a small number. The women and children aretreated as slaves. Acts of violence are common amongfomorians. sometimes resulting in permanent injury or death.Fomorian giants have been known to work with othercreatures for evil causes. Usually the other creatures mustcompletely dominate the fomorians, or be capable of it, to formthe alliance. Such an agreement lasts only as long as thefomorians fear their cohorts. Once their interests no longercoincide or the fomorians no longer feel threatened, theydouble-cross their partners, as quickly as possible.Ecology: These twisted giants can live for weeks on little or nofood, This is good, because their underground dwellings do notprovide an abundance of it They can eat almost any organicmaterial, including fungi, lichens, plants of all sorts, bats, miceand fish. They particularly savor the taste of large mammals,especially those that beg not to be eaten. Preparing a mealusually involves torture rather than any efforts to improve itstaste.
Shaman Witch doctor,Shaman Witch doctor,Shaman / Witch doctor.Shaman Witch doctor.1-8, or by weapon (2-16 + 9)Hurling rocks for 2-20 (2dl0)Impervious to coldNilLike all evil giants, frost giants have a reputation for crudenessand stupidity. This reputation is deserved, but frost giants arecrafty fighters.Frost giants have muscular, roughly human builds. The typicaladult male is 2T tall and weighs about 8,000 pounds. Females areslightly shorter and lighter, but otherwise identical to males.Frost giants have snow-white or ivory skin. Their hair is lightblue or dirty yellow, with matching eyes. They can live to be 250years old.A frost giant's natural Armor Class is 5, Warriors usually wearchain mail and metal helmets decorated with horns or feathers(AC 0). They also wear skins and pelts, along with any jewelrythey own*Frost giants carry their belongings in huge sacks, A typicalfrost giant s sack contains 2-5 Ud4+1) throwing rocks, the gi¬ants wealth, and 3-12 (3d4l mundane items. Everything in a gi-ants bag is old, worn, dirty, and smelly, making theidentification of any valuable items difficult.Frost giants speak their own language and the language com¬mon to all giants.Combat: Frost giants are immune to cold. Adult frost giantscan hurl rocks for 2-20 (2dl0) points of damage. Their minimumrange is 3 yards while their maximum is 200 yards. They cancatch similar large missiles 40% of the time. They usually willstart combat at a distance, throwing rocks until they run out ofammunition, or the opponent closes. One of their favorite strate¬gies is to ambush victims by hiding buried in the snow at the topof an tcy or snowy slope where opponents will have difficultyreaching them.Warriors favor huge battle axes. A frost giant's oversizedweapons do double normal (man-sized) damage to all oppo¬nents, plus the giants strength bonus. Thus, a frost giant battleaxe does 2-16 (2d8) +9 points of damage.Habitat Society: Frost giants live in small bands consisting of achief, his henchmen, and their camp followers, A band usuallywill occupy a crude castle or frigid cavern. When encountered intheir lair there will be 9-16 Id8 + S) giants; half of whom will beimmature, To determine a giant's maturity roll ld4. A roll of 4indicates an infant with no combat ability and hit points of ogre;rolls of 1-3 indicate older progeny with hit dice, damage, and at¬tack rolls equal to that of a stone giant.Particularly strong or intelligent frost giant chieftains willcommand bands three or four times normal size. A chieftain whocommands 20 or more giants is called a jarl. laris always willhave better than normal armor and a weapon of +1 to +3 en¬chantment.There is a 20% chance that any band of frost giants will have ashaman (80%) or witch doctor (20%). If the group is led by ajarl, there is an 80% chance for a spell caster. Frost giant shamansare priests of up to 7th level. A shaman can cast normal or re¬versed spells from the healing, charm, protection, divination , orweather spheres. Frost giant witch doctors are priest/wizards ofup to 7th/3rd level: they prefer spells that can bewilder and con¬found other giants. Favorite spells include: unseen servant,shocking grasp . detect magic , ventriloquism, deeppockets . ESPmirror image, and mrisfhiJffy.Frost giants often capture and tame other creatures as guards,There is a 50% chance that a frost giant lair will contain 1-6winter wolves* Larger than normal groups check once for everyeight giants, Bands with 20 or more giants have a additional 30%chance to have 1-4 yeti, larger groups check once for every 16giants, A jaiTs band has a 20% chance to have 1-2 subdued whitedragons in addition to other guards. The dragons w'ill be age cat¬egory 2-5 Ud4 + 1L Frost giants also take captives to hold forransom or use as slaves. There is a 15% chance that a lair willcontain 1-2 captives, larger bands check once per eight giants.Captives can be of any race.Ecology: Frost giants live in frigid, arctic lands with glaciersand heavy snowfall. Frost giants eat mostly meat, which they canhunt and kill themselves. They raid human and demj-humansettlements for foodstuffs and other booty.
1-6 or by weapon (2-12 + 7)Hurling rocks for 2-16 (2d8)Hill giants are selfish, cunning brutes who survive through hunt¬ing and by terrorizing and raiding nearby communities. Despitetheir low intelligence, they are capable fighters.Hill giants are oddly simian and barbaric in appearance, withoverly long arms, stooped shoulders, and low foreheads, Eventhough they are the smallest of the giants, their limbs are moremuscular and massive than those of the other giant races. Theaverage hdl giant is 16 feet tall and weighs about 4,500 pounds.Females have the same builds as males. Their skin color rangesfrom a light tan to a deep ruddy brown. Their hair is brown orblack, and their eyes are black. Hill giants can live to be 200 yearsold.Hill giants' natural Armor Gass is 5. This is reduced to an Ar¬mor Class of 3 when they wear crudely-sewn animal hides, whichare the equivalent of leather armor. Nearly all hill giants wearthese hides, which are a symbol of esteem in some hill giantcommunities—the more hides a giant has, the more large kills tohis credit, Only a few (5%) of the giants fashion metal armorfrom the armor of men they have defeated. These giants have anArmor Class of 0. Like other races of giants, hill giants carry theirbelongings with them in huge hide sacks, A typical hill giant sbag will contain 2-8 <2d4J throwing rocks, the giant's wealth, and1-8 additional common items.Hill giants speak their own language and a tongue common toall giants. In addition, 50% also speak ogre.Combat: Hill giants preter to fighL their opponents from highrocky outcroppings where they can pelt their targets with rocksand boulders while limiting the risks posed to themselves.Hill giants" favorite weapons are oversized clubs which do 2-12+ 7 points of damage (double the damage of a man-sized dubplus their strength bonus). They hurl rocks for 2-16 (2d8) pointsof damage. Their targets for such attacks must be between 3 and200 yards away from the giant. They can catch rocks or othersimilar missiles 30% of the time.Habitat Society: A hill giant lair will have 9-16 (ld8 +8) giants:usually an extended family. Sometimes these families will acceptlone hill giants into their folds. If six or more giants are encoun¬tered in a lair, half of them will be male, one quarter will be fe¬male, and the remainder will be immature giants. To determine agiant's maturity, roil ld4. A roll of 4 indicates an infant with nocombat ability and hit points of gnoll: roils of 1-3 indicate olderprogeny with hit dice, damage, and attack rolls equal to that ofan ogre.Occasionally a hill giant with an average intelligence can befound. Such a giant is capable of rallying bands of his peers so 2,3, or 4 times the number of giants usually appearing can be en¬countered. These 'giant kings," as they call themselves, stageraids on human towns or against other races of giants.Although hill giants prefer temperate areas, they can be foundin practically any climate where there is an abundance of hillsand mountains. They lair in caves, excavated dens, or crudehuts. Those who live in colder climates have developed moreskills with preparing and using skins to keep themselves warmand to keep the harsh winds out of their lairs.There is a 50% chance a band of hill giants will have guards intheir lairs, and the guarding creatures will be 2-8 (2d4) direwolves (50%), 1-3 giant lizards (30%), or a group of 2-8 (2d4iogres (20%),The majority of hill giants are suspicious of magic and willseek to destroy magic items they acquire as treasure. They cere¬monially kill mages.Ecology: Hill giants' main diet consists of meat, which they ob¬tain by hunting. The flesh of young green dragons is considered adelicacy, and frequently giants who live on hills and mountainscovered with forests will organize hunting parties in search ofgreen dragon lairs. In turn, green dragons have been known tohunt hill giants,Sometimes bands of hill giants will trade with each other orwith bands of ogres to get foodstuffs and trinkets.
2-16 +9 or 2-12 +9/2-12 +9Surprise, arrowsSee belowPowerful, lanky, and strictly carnivorous, jungle giants are aterror to all the animals of the tropical forests. They are greathunters and stalkers, able to clear a huge tract of forest of allgame and then move on.A typical jungle giant stands 18' tall yet weighs only 3,000pounds“Very thin for a giant. Females are generally taller thanmales. They can live to be 200 years old.Jungle giants always carry everything they need with them;tools for making and maintaining their weapons, fire-starters,tinder and spare bits of leather and sinew used to repair cloth¬ing. They also carry their valuables, and every adult jungle gi¬ant carries a qui ver of arrows.Jungle giants speak their own language and the languages oftribes of nearby humans and humanoids.Thin and very tall jungle giants easily blend into the verticallandscape of the tropical forest. Their wavy hair is pale green,and their skin is a rich muddy yellow, like sunlight on the forestfloor. They rarely wear more dothing than strictly necessary, asthey prefer complete freedom of movement when hunting.Many groups of jungle giants use ritual tattooing, colorfulfeather headdresses and even filed teeth to show their fierce¬ness. They sometimes decorate themselves with mud. sticks,and leaves when stalking especially large or wary game.Combat: Jungle giants use 15' long bows crafted to take advan¬tage of their tremendous size and strength. These giants are veryquick with their huge bows and can fire two arrows each round.They will use poisoned arrows to bring down their prey morequickly. If these arrows are used in combat, opponents mustsave vs* paralyzation at ^2 or be rendered immobile for 2-12turns. Even humanoid creatures with the strength to pull a jun¬gle giant bow cannot use it. because the arrows are over 6' long(2d6 +9 damage). Jungle giants will occasionally use the trunkof a dead tree as a dub. doing 2d8 +9 points damage.Jungle giants prefer to take their prey from ambushes, firingtheir bows from the treetops and then swinging down sturdybranches or thick ropes to finish off their prey. Camouflaged gi¬ants cause a - ! penalty on opponents surprise rolls. When set¬ting up a blind, they can camouflage themselves in jungle terrainwith a 60% chance of success. Setting up a blind or decoratingthemselves with jungle camouflage takes three turns.Habitat-Society: Jungle giants are friendlier than most otherraces of giants, and they will often cooperate with human jungletribes on hunts. The giants provide strength and raw power, andthe humans provide the numbers and skill to drive animals intoambushes.Jungle giants have absolutely no compunctions about eatingany form of meat—mammal, reptile, amphibian, or avian.They know r how to stalk, kill, and prepare everything from eggsto full-grown animals, and from scavengers to predators. Theirvillages reflect this carnivorous tendency; the huts are madefrom wooden posts with roofs of greased animal hides stitchedtogether with intestines. The smell of smoking meats and butch¬ery hang in the air, and huge quantities of dragonflies and otherinsects swarm around the villages. A jungle giant village is 50%likely to shelter 1-6 giant dragonflies.Ecology: Jungle giants think of most creatures as prey, but thosethey accept as fellow hunters they respect as equals, regardlessof their size. Although they much prefer the jungle terrain theyknow so well, they are often forced to leave the trees for thesavanna when their numbers become too great to survive in thejungle. They think nothing of eating every snake, antelope, cat.warthog, ostrich, and elephant they come across. Jungle giantson the savannah often return to the forest, because their greatheight makes stealthy hunting difficult for them on openground.
1-8 or by weapon (4dl0'+10)Hurling rocks for 2-20NilNilNormal: 7,000Infant: Niljuvenile: 3,000Shaman: 8 000Shaman, 3rd: 9,000Mountain giants are huge humanoids that live in remote moun¬tain caverns.Standing 14 feet tall and weighing 2,000 pounds, mountain gi¬ants are impressive foes. They greatly resemble hill giants. Theirskin color is a light tan to reddish brown with straight black hair.The males have heavy beards but no mustaches, and they havelarge pot bellies. They are typically clothed in rough hides orskins and carry huge dubs as weapons. The stale reek of a moun¬tain giant can be defected several hundred feet downwind.Combat: Mountain giants always attack in a straightforwardmanner, not by ambush or deceit. They love to get into a high,unassailable spot with lots of boulders. When in such a position,mountain giants rarely take cover, but stand in the open to flingtheir missiles. They can hurl boulders down on their opponentsfor 2dl0 points of damage each. They can catch similar missiles3G% of the time.In melee they use huge dubs that cause 4dl0 + IO points ofdamage, including their Strength bonus. These clubs are usuallyjust large tree limbs or logs. They usually keep several suchweapons around. Mountain giants are as strong as fire giants( 22 )A mountain giant can summon and control other monsters.This summoning takes a full turn to perforin and ld6 hours passbefore the creatures appear. A summoning results in eitherldlQ + 5 ogres (70 %) r Ido+3 trolls (20%), or ld4 hill giants(10%), although the giant has no idea in advance of what he willget. The control is very loose, not absolute domination. Themountain giant can give a broadly defined command and themonsters obey as they see fit. The summoned monsters stay withand fight for the mountain giant, but they value (heir own livesover that of the giant. The summoned creatures stay with the gi¬ant until killed, sent away* or another summoning is made.Habitat Society: The home of a family of mountain giants is of¬ten in a large rock cavern in a mountain. Frequently there areunexplored passages leading out of the giants' home. They rarelyhave any interest in anything beyond their cavern. There is a75% chance of summoned creatures acting as guards and under¬lings in the cavern.The females and young are rarely seen, since they stick dose tothe cavern. Mountain giants are polygamous, usually one femaleliving with several males, Three quarters of the young are male,which accounts for their low population* if two or more moun¬tain giants are in a lair, there is a 50% chance of a female and a25% chance of a child. Roll ld4 to determine the age of the child.If it is a 4, it is a helpless infant or small child. A roll of 1-3 indi¬cates older children or teens that have the Hit Dice, damage, andattack rolls of hill giants.There is a 20% chance that one of the giants in a family is ashaman. Roll ld6 to determine the level of spell use, J-4 meaning1st level 5-6 indicating 2nd level. This shaman can cast from thespheres of All, Animal, Charm, Combat. Elemental, and Heal¬ing. He has an innate ability to find caves and cavern entranceswithin half a mile, unless these are magically hidden.While only one family is found in a given lair, several familiesmake up a loose tribe scattered over a mountain or range. Eachtribe has a 3rd-kvel shaman as its leader, He presides over theextremely rare gatherings of the tribe and counsels those willingto travel to talk to him. The shaman always lives with a group ofsummoned monsters, but never with other mountain giants.Ecology: Mountain giants are foragers and hunters, Their fa¬vorite food is mountain sheep, They also eat nuts, tubers, andother edible mountain plants. Nothing hunts mountain giants,but sometimes they pick the wrong cave in which to set up house¬keeping* Since they tend not to fully explore all the back tunnels,nasty things from underground have been known to attack anddevour sleeping giants.Since these giants are neither good nor evil, it is possible to setup peaceful relations with them. However, they are suspicious ofand reluctant to deal with outsiders.
Reef giants are the loners of gjant-kind, although they often livein remarkably well-appointed mansions that seem to be no morethan huts from the outside. They sometimes become sailors, buttheir huge mass limits them to the largest of vessels. Reef giantsare typically 16' tall and weigh 4,000 pounds. Reef giants canlive to be 600 years old.Reel giants speak their own language as well as the giantishtrade tongue and the languages of storm and cloud giants. Inaddition, 40% of the giants also speak the common longue.Reef giants have burnished coppery skin and pale white hair.They are barrel-chested and powerfully-muscled from the exer¬tion of forcing their huge bodies through water. Reef giants havea Strength of 22. Reef giants wear skins or garments made ofbraided hair when ashore, but swim wearing no more than abelt for knives and pouches.Combat: Reef giants prefer to fight in or under water, and theyare fierce fighters when angered. They suffer no penalties whenfighting in or under water. They cannot be harmed by water- orice-based attack forms. They typically attack with giant tridentsfor 2-20 +10 points of damage, but have been known to lashout with a huge fist f IdlO points damage) now and again.Once per day a reef giant can form a whirlpool. Unless a suc¬cessful Strength ability check is made, creatures within 10 yardsof the giant are sucked into the whirlpool and suffer 2-16 pointsof battering damage plus 2-20 points drowning and chokingdamage (unless the creatures arc able to breathe water, m whichcase only the battering damage applies). The whirlpool is notpowerful enough to draw in ships,Reef giants can throw boulders up to 350 yards for 3-30(3dl0) points of damage. They prefer to use thrown boulders tosink unwelcome ships. Boulders are not used againsl individualopponents.Habitat Society: Reef giants are often solitary for long periodsof time, although they mate for life. When their children reachpuberty, they are sent out on their own to seek an island or reefhabitat to make their heme,The mansions of reef giants are sometimes built into the hillsand gorges of the islands, and they are always stocked with fur¬niture and decorations collected over generations. These man¬sions are passed on from one giant to another; the eldestdaughter is generally reared to provide for her parents as theygrow old and is usually given the mansion and all its goods upontheir death. These welkdowried daughters are the objects ofmuch competition between reef giant suitors, each of whomseeks to both prove himself to the new mistress of the mansionand undo his competitors by any means available. Diving, surf¬ing, and fishing competitions are common in reef giant court¬ship.Ecology: Reef giants are scavengers who fish and forage coralreefs for a hundred different sources of food. They can net entireschools of fjsh, and as accomplished divers they can retrievehoards of pearls, sponges, and coral. Their enormous strengthallows them to swim for hours at a time without tiring. In thisway reel giants can ama&s huge amounts of goods to trade forother items.Some reef giants keep docks of goats or sheep on their islandhomes, but these giants are generally elderly and not as capableof foraging successfully.Reef giants frequently enter into contracts or trade agree¬ments with humans and other mercanlile races. In exchange forpearls and other valuables from the sea, they are given cloth,sweets, and metal goods.The reef giants willingness to plunder the sea has made themthe enemies of merfolk, tritons, and other ocean-dwelling races.
1-8 qr by weapon (2-12 + 8)Hurling rocks for 3-30 (3dl0)See belowNilStone giants are lean, but muscular. Their hard, hairless flesh issmooth and gray, making it easy for them to blend in with theirmountainous surroundings. Their gaunt facial features and deep,sunken black eyes make them seem perpetually grim.The typical stone giant is 10' tall and weighs 9,000 pounds be¬cause of its dense flesh. Females are a little shorter and lighter.The giants' natural Armor Class is 0. They do not wear armor toaugment that, preferring to wear stone-colored garments. Stonegiants can live to be 800 years old.Stone giants, like several other giant races, carry some of theirbelongings with them. They leave their more valuable items intheir lairs, however. A typical stone giant's bag will contain 2-24(2dl2) throwing rocks, a portion of the giant's wealth, and 1-8additional common items.Stone giants speak their own language, as well as those of hillgiants, cloud giants, and storm giants. In addition, 50% of thegiants also speak the common language of man.Combat: When possible, stone giants Fight from a distance.They are able to hurl rocks a minimum distance of 3 yards to amaximum distance of 300 yards, doing 3-30 (3dl0) points ofdamage with each rock. These giants are able to catch stones andsimilar missiles 90% of the time. A favorite tactic of stone giantsis to stand nearly motionless against rocks, blending in with thebackground, then moving forward to throw rocks, surprisingtheir foes. Many giants set up piles of rocks near their lair whichcan be triggered like an avalanche when intruders get too dose.When stone giants are forced into melee combat, they use largeclubs chiseled out of stone which do 2-12 (2d6) +8 points of dam¬age; double normal (man-sizedI club damage plus the giantsstrength bonus.Habitat Society: Stone giants prefer to dwell in deep caves highon rocky, storm-swept mountains. They normally live in thecompany of their relatives, though such a dans usually includeno more than 10 giants. Clans of giants do locate their lairs neareach other, however, for a sense of community and protection. Amountain range commonly has 2-8 dans lairing there.Stone giants are crude artists, painting scenes of their lives onthe walls of their lairs and on tanned hide scrolls. Some giants arefond of music and play stone flutes and drums, Others make sim¬ple jewelry, fashioning painted stone beads into necklaces.If eight or more giants are encountered in a dan's lair, onequarter will be female, one quarter male, and the remainder off¬spring. To determine a giant's maturity roll ld4, A roll ot 4 indi¬cates an infant with no combat ability and hit points of an ogre:rolls of T3 indicate older progeny wi th hit dice, damage, and at¬tack rolls equal to those of a hill giant.One in 20 stone giants develop special abilities related to theirenvironment. These giant elders are able to stone shape, stonete/L and transmute? rock to mud (or mud to rock) once per day asif they were 5th level mages. One in 10 of these exceptional giantscan also cast spells as if he were a 3rd level wizard. Their spellscan be determined randomly or chosen to fit a specific encounteras desired. Frequently these giants are able to rise to positions ofpower and are considered the leaders of several clans.Stone giants are usually found to mountain ranges in temper¬ate and sub-tropical areas. Stone giants are fond of cave bearsand 75% of their lairs will have 1-8 of them as guards, The tewstone giants living in cold areas use polar bears as guards.Stone giants are playful, especially at night. They are tond ofrock throwing contests and other games that test their might.Tribes of giants mil often gather to toss rocks at each other, thelosing side being the giants who are hit more often.Ecology: Stone giants are omnivorous, but they will eat onlyfresh food. They cook and eat their meat quickly after i t has beenkilled. They use the skins of the animals for blankets and tradewhat they do not need with nearby human communities in ex¬change for bolts of cloth or herd animals which they use for food.Many stone giant bands keep giant goats in and near their lairs sothey will have a continuous supply of milk, cheese, and butter.
OmnivorousExceptional (15-16)E, QxlO, SChaotic goodXF VALUEInfantJuvenile, -3Juvenile, -2Juvenile, -1Spell caster, 1stSpell caster, 2ndSpell caster, 3rdSpell caster, 4th +Storm giants are gentle and reclusive. They are usually tolerantof others, but can be very dangerous when angry.Storm giants resemble well-formed humans of gargantuan pro¬portions, Adult males and females are about 26' tall and weighabout 15,000 pounds. Storm giants have pale, light green or(rarely) violet skin. Green-skinned storm giants have dark greenhair and glittering emerald eyes, Violet-skinned storm giantshave deep violet or blue-black hair with silvery gray or purpleeyes. Storm giants can live to be 600 years old.A storm giant s garb usually is a short, loose tunic belted at thewaist, sandals or bare Feet, and a headband. They wear a fewpieces of simple but finely crafted jewelry: anklets (favored bybare-footed giants), rings, or circlets being most common.Storm giants usually carry pouches attached to their belts.These hold only a few tools, necessities, and a simple musicalinstrument—usually a panpipe or harp. Other than the jewelrythey wear, they prefer to leave their wealth in their lairs.They speak their own language as well as cloud giant, the tonguecommon to all giants, and the common tongue of humankind.Combat: AH storm giants are immune to electricity and light¬ning. They use weapons and special abilities instead of hurlingrocks, but can catch large missiles 65% of the time.Storm giants are bom with tunter breathing ability and canmove, attack, and use magic under water as if they were on land.Juvenile and adult storm giants can cast control weather and levi¬tate spells lifting their own weight and as much as 4,000 addition¬al pounds twice a day Adult storm giants also can call lightning(3 bolts ot 15 8-sided dice each), lightrtmg bolt (1 bolt of 15 6-sided dice), control winds, and use meat her summoning once aday. A storm giant uses its magical abilities at I5th level. An an¬gry storm giant usually will summon a storm and ra/J lightningThey employ gigantic two-handed swords in battle, A stormgiant s oversized weapons do triple normal (man-sized) damageto all opponents, plus the giant s strength bonus. Thus, a stormgiant s two-handed sword does 3-30 <3d 10) +12 points of dam¬age. They also use massive composite bows which have a 300yard range and do 3-18 (3d6) points ot damage. There is a 10%chance that any storm giant will have enchanted weapons.A storm giant's natural Armor Class is 0, In battle, storm gi¬ants usually wear elaborate bronze plate mail (AC -6).Habitat/Sorieiy: Storm giants are retiring and solitary but notshy They live in castles built on cloud islands (60%). mountainpeaks (20%), or underwater (10%). They live quiet, reflectivelives and spend their time musing about the world, composingand playing music, and tilling their land or gathering food. Land-and air-dwelHng storm giants usually are on good terms withneighboring silver dragons and good cloud giants, and cooperatewith them for mutual defense. Aquatic storm giants have similarrelationships with mermen and bronze dragons.When two or more storm giants are encountered in lair theywill be a mated couple and their children. To determine eachyoung giants maturity, roll ld4. A roll of 4 indicates an infantwith no combat ability and hit points of ogre: rolls of ]-3 indicateolder progeny with hit dice, damage, and attack rolls equal tothat of a cloud giant.There is a 20% chance that an adult storm giant is also a priest(70%) or priest/wizard (30%). Storm giants can attain 9th levelas priests and 7th level as wizards. Storm giant priests can castregular spells from the Animal, Charm, Combat, Creation,Guardian, Healing, Plant. Weather, and Sun spheres. Storm gi¬ant wizards are generalists, and typically know spells from theAlteration, Invocation/Evocation, Con juration/Summoning,and Abjuration schools.Storm giant lairs are always protected by guards. Land or aer¬ial lairs have 1-2 rocs (70%), which also serve a mounts, or 1-4griffons (30%). Underwater lairs have 2-8 (2d4) sea lions.Ecology: Sturm giants live off the land in the immediate vicinity oftheir lairs. Lf the natural harvest is not enough to sustain them, theycreate and carefully till large areas of gardens, fields, and vineyards.They do not keep animals for food, preferring to hunt.
LUMATE TERRAIN:REQUENCY:JRGANIZATION:ACTIVITY CYCLE:DIET:Known as "human behemoths,' these human giants inhabit areasinfested with hill giants and ogres.Verbeeg vary in height from ft 1 /a to 10 feet tall, and weigh be¬tween 300 and 400 pounds They are unusually thin for theirheight, although this does not inhibit their fighting ability. Somehave minor deformities, such as club foot, uneven eyes, hair lips,etc. In all other respects they appear human, including skin, hair,and eye color. They wear as much protective clothing and armoras they can obtain, which isn t much. Usually they wear furs andhides with pieces oi metal armor stitched into strategic places.They almost always carry shields and have the best weaponsthey can steal. Typically this means clubs and spears,Combat: Verbeeg are smart enough to let others soften up theenemy first. This does not mean that they are cowards, only self¬ish and practical. Since they are commonly found with hill giantsand ogres, in the first few rounds of combat verbeeg drive theirless intelligent companions before them into battle. This is ac¬companied by many curses, oaths, and highly descriptive ac¬counts of the giants and ogres' parentage.Once the battle has begun, the verbeeg take on the stragglersand use their missile weapons, usually spears. The Strength ofthe giant determines how much further than normal the weaponscan be hurled. Whatever their weaponry the verbeeg get aStrength bonus for damage. Each giant must have his Strengthdetermined individually (or once for the whole group, at theDMs option) by rolling Id 10 and consulting the following table,Armor is always at leas! the equivalent of AC 4, and some Limesbetter, although never better than AC 1-chance), which also share their lair? 50% of the time ld6 verbeegare with ld6 wolves or worgs (in polar climes winter wolves orpolar bears); the rest of the time (20%) 1-2 of them are encoun¬tered with a normal sized group of wandering monsters found inthat area (DM must use reasonable judgment in this case).A verbeeg lair is usually an underground place, such as a caveor inside old ruins, There 5d6 of them can be found, an equalnumber of females (equal to males in combat), and 2d6 young.Half the young fight as bugbears, the other half fight as goblins.A lair usually includes 2d4 wolves (75% chance) or ld4 worgs(25% chance). In arctic climes substitute 1-2 polar bears forwolves, and 1-3 winter wolves for wargs.There is a 2% cumulative chance per giant of a shaman withthe tribe. The verbeeg are jointly ruled by [he shaman (if there isone J and a warrior chieftain. The shaman can be up to 7th level.The warrior chieftain always has 18/00 Strength and no fewerthan 40 hit points. The chieftain is responsible for all activitiesinvolving hunting, war and negotiations with strangers, The sha¬man is responsible for all activities Inside the tribe, dispensingjudgments concerning law and all magic. Any magical items inthe tribe belong to the shaman; he has a 90 % chance of knowinghow to use these. Most magical items that he does not under¬stand are thrown into the tribal refuse heap before too long.Habitat/Society: Verbeeg are found in the same climates asogres and hill giants. These human behemoths are never foundwandering alone. Thirty percent of wandering verbeeg encounbers find ld6 of these giant-kin with Id4 hill giants or ogres (equalEcology; Verbeeg eat almost anything, but they love flesh of allsorts. They maintain a mutually beneficial relationship with thegiants and ogres that share their lair. The verbeeg provide theintelligence and direction that these giant types lack, and the gi¬ants provide protection by their greater fighting prowess. Towatch a group in action can be hilarious, so long as you are nottheir intended victim. Hill giants and ogres are too stupid tothink much on their own. They tend to follow directions too lit¬erally- This usually infuriates the verbeeg. They hop back andforth from foot to foot screaming insults at the befuddled giantsthat tower over them in height and size, as even the simplest in¬structions are misinterpreted by these denser humanoids.
^4 penally to opponents' surprise rollsResistant to some spellsWood giants (also known as voadkyn) are one of the smallest ofthe minor races of giants, looking somewhat like giant-sizedwood elves. They are flighty, frivolous, and good friends withwood elves.Standing 9Va feet tali, wood giants weigh around 700 pounds.They have the physical proportions of humans, which makesthem thin and light for giants. They are completely devoid of fa¬cial and body hair, including eyebrows. Their heads seem overlylarge for their bodies, especially the jaws, chin, and mouth. Theirears are placed higher than on a human, almost completelyabove the line of the eyes.Wood giants can be almost any shade of brown, mixed withyellow or green. They are fond of leather armor and ring mail. Awood giant carries two weapons—a two-handed sword and agiant-sized long bow with quiver. A special sheath for the swordis steel tipped, enabling it to be used as a walking stick. This doesnot in any way disguise the sword.They wrap their ankles in leather strips almost up to the knee,although the foot itself is mostly bare. The only garments theywear are loose trousers or a short kilt. A wood giant alwayswears a leather forearm sheath to protect his arm from the bow¬string, Ah of these items are frequently stained in forest colors ofgreen and brown.Comb ah Voadkyn do not Bght unless forced to defend them¬selves or allies. Their favorite weapon is their huge, non-magicallong bow. They get a +1 bonus to attack rolls and 50% betterrange because of its unusual size, The matching arrows are overfour feet long and cause ld8 points of damage. Wood giants donot hurl rocks or boulders. If pressed into melee, they wield theirtwo-handed swords with one hand.When encountered, the Strength of the voadkyn must be deter¬mined by rolling percentile dice. The resulting number is the IS(roll) value for their strength. This gives them a *3 to +6damage bonus, They do not receive any attack roll bonus forStrength. These giant-kin are usually in the company of ld4w'ood elves (60%), ld4 dire wolves (30%), or both (10%).Wood giants are 90% resistant to sleep and charm spells: theyhave infravision up to 90 feet.The only magical skill voadkyn have is the ability to poly¬morph into any humanoid figure, from 3 to 15 teet in height.They cannot become a specific individual, only a typical speci¬men of that race. They have been known to use this ability to joinWood giants can move silently in a forest, despite their greatheight, thus imposing a ^4 penalty to opponents' surprise rolls.They can blend Into forest vegetation, becoming effectively in¬visible, Only creatures able to detect invisible objects can seethem. Although they are not Invisible while attacking, they areextremely quick (Dexterity 16) and can move out of hiding,launch an arrow, and move back into hiding in the same round.These arrows seem to come from nowhere unless the target islooking at the wood giants' hiding spot.Ha bi la ^Society: Wood giants inhabit the same forests as woodelves. They have no lairs, choosing to live under the stars or withthe wood elves for a time. Wood giants encountered in the forestare mostly male (90%). Female wood giants usually remain at amakeshift camp or with the wood elves at their lair. Offspring arerare, as each female gives birth to only ld4 children in her life¬time. The young are bom and raised deep in the woods amongthe wood elves, away from prying eyes.The strong bond between wood elves and wood giants goesback further than either race can remember. This may accounttor the elven abilities of the giants. They do not mix or treat withany other intelligent creatures, although they tolerate any goodelf. Like the elves, wood giants are fond of finely cut gems andwell-crafted magical items.Humans w T ho have had contact with wood giants describethem as friendly enough, but flighty and frivolous, and never in agreat hurry to do anything other than eat and drink largeamounts of wine. Treants (with whom they occasionally con¬verse) consider them irrational, foolish, and occasionally obnox¬ious, but enjoyable company.Ecology: The jaw of the voadkyn is large because of the over¬sized grinding teeth in it. These teeth are completely unsujted foreating meat, but they are perfect for vegetables and other plants.Wood giants can eat the leaves and roots of many plants that areinedible to humans. They especially enjoy nuts and seeds.
They come screaming, jabbering, and howling out of the night.Dozens, maybe hundreds, of hunchbacked, naked humanoidsswarm unceasingly forward, brandishing short swords. Theyhave no thought of safety, subtlety, or strategy, leaving otherswith no hope of stopping their mass assault. And then, havingcome and killed, the gibberiings move on randomly back into thenight.The first impression of gibberiings is of a writhing mass of furand flesh in the distant moonlit darkness. The pandemonium isactually a mass of pale, hunchbacked humanoids, with pointedcanine ears, black manes surrounding their hideous, grinningfaces. Their eyes are black and shine with a maniacal gleam.They carry short swords in their overly long arms as they lopeever faster forward.Combat: Gibberiings attack In great numbers, uttering ghastlyhowls, clicks, shrieks, and insane chattering noises which causeeven the boldest hirelings to check morale each round. PCs needonly make a morale check tf it is appropriate to their character.The screaming mob is completely disorganized in form, and ran¬dom in direction.The gibberiings attack with common swords, but such is theirskill and practice in using these weapons that they are +1 to hit.Their forward motion slows only long enough to kill anythingmoving, then continues forward, their bloodlust apparently un¬abated. They always fight to the death. All food in their path isdevoured, including the f allen among their own number, and anyunfortified building or objects are generally wrecked,The only true hope of survival, should a herd of gibberiings beencountered, is to take strategic advantage of their fear and de¬testation of bright light. The gibberiings generally frequent onlydense forests and subterranean passages, loathing bright light ofall kinds, and are particularly afraid of fire, Although their massattacks would quickiy overwhelm someone wielding a torch, abright bonfire or magical light of sufficient intensity will holdthem at bay or deflect their path.Habitat Society: It is difficult to imagine a gibberling social struc¬ture. It can be roughly compared to the social structure of lem¬mings throwing themselves into the sea. or of a school of pirhanain a feeding frenzy. There is no sense, no organization.and no individuality. Though they dearly have a primitivemeans of communicating among themselves, they have no dis-cemable language,Gibberiings traveling above-ground invariably burrow intothe ground to hide during the daytime, and it is at such time thatthey are most vulnerable. They can easily be tracked by the pathof chaos and destruction they leave, and can be quickly dis-patched while they lie dormant just beneath the surface of theground. If uncovered, they awake, but generally cower in fear atthe bright light surrounding them, and so are easy prey. Subter¬ranean gibberiings may burrow into the ground, or may simplyHe down in a curled, fetal posture at times of rest. They awakesuddenly, as a group, and burst in unison out of the ground,howling and gibbering m a most frightful way.If captured, these strange creatures speak only their own in¬comprehensible gibberish, and show neither the patience nor theinclination to learn other languages or communicate whatsoeverwith their captors. Instead, they beat against their cages and flingthemselves at barred windows and doorways in pitiful attemptsto escape their captivity.It is unclear how or when or even if gibberiings procreate.Ecology: Attempts to find the gibberiings' lairs have inevitablyled back to subterranean passages, where the trail is eventuallylost in the deepest rock-floored recesses of the caverns.Gibberiings require a prodigious amount of food to supporttheir manic nocturnal existence, stripping to the bone anyone oranything that should fall in their path. Their fur is commonlyinfested with lice and other pests picked up during their bur¬rowed slum her. Their hides are vile and worthless, Gibberiingscarry no treasure or other useful items.Their swords are of thecommonest variety, with no markings or decoration, and are of¬ten pitted and dull. In short, gibberiings serve no purpose and noknown master, save random death in the night.
The gift are a race of powerfully muscled mercenaries. They arecivilized, though they lack mages among their own race. Giff hireon with various groups throughout the universe as mercenaries,bodyguards, enforcers, and general legbreakers.The giff is humanoid, with stocky flat, cylindrical legs and ahumanoid torso, arms, and fingers. Its chest is broad and sup-ports a hippopotamus head with a natural helmet of flexible, chi-tinous plates. Giff come in colors ranging from black to gray to arich gold, and many have colorful tattoos that leave their bodiesa patchwork record of past victories, Giff speak their own lan¬guage and the Common tongue.along the large plates. Armor repair is a major hobby among thegift-Finally, giff are somewhat magic resistant. They are deeplysuspicious of magic, magicians, and magical devices.Combat: The giff are military-minded, and organize themselvesinto squads, platoons, companies, corps, and larger groups. Thenumber of gill in a platoon varies according to the season, situa¬tion, and level of danger involved. A gift "platoon ' hired to pro¬tect a gambling operation may number two, while a platoonhired to invade an illithid stronghold may number well over ahundred.The gift pride themselves on their weapon skills, and any giffcarries a number of swords, daggers, maces, and similar tools onhand to deal with troublemakers.A giff's true love in weaponry is the gun. Any giff has a 20%chance of having an arquebus and sufficient smoke powder for2d4 shots A misfiring weapon matters little to the giff (occasion¬al fatalities are expected), the flash, noise, and damage is whatmost impresses them.Even unarmed, the giff are powerful opponents. They are asstrong as a hill giant ( +7 damage adjustment for Strength), Theywill wade into a brawl just for the pure tun of it, tossing variouscombatants on both sides around to prove themselves the vic¬tors. Once a weapon is bared, the giff consider all restrictionsoft—the challenge is to the death.The top of the gift's head and snout are plated with thick, chi-tinous plates, flexible enough to permit motion, but giving thecreature a natural helmet. The gift can charge using a head butt,inflicting 2d6 points ot damage.The giff prize themselves as mercenaries, and to that end havemade elaborate suits of armor (AC 2). These include full helmswith other monsters on the crests, inlaid with ivory and boneHabitai/Society: Gift of both sexes serve in their platoons, andboth fight equally well. Giff young are raised tenderly until theyare old enough to survive an exploding arquebus, then are in*ducted fully into the platoon. Every giff, male, female, and giftl-ing, has a rank within society, which can be changed only bysomeone of a higher rank. Within these ranks are sub-ranks andwithin those sub-ranks are color markings and badges. Thehighest-ranking giff gives the orders, the others obey. It does notmatter if the orders are foolish or even suicidal—following themis the purpose of the giff in the universe, A quasi-mystical faithamong the giff mercenaries confirms that all things have theirplace, and the gifts is to follow orders.Gift mercenaries are usually paid in smoke powder, thoughthey often will accept other weapons and armor. It is purely abarter system, but to hire one giff for one standard week requiresseven charges of smoke powder (one per day).Giff are fierce fighters, despite their somewhat comical appear¬ance and mania for weapons. They will not. however, willinglyfight other giff. If forced into such a situation on a battlefield,both groups retire for at least a day of drinking and sorting outranks. There is a 10% chance that one platoon will join anotherin this case, but it is more likely that both will quit their currenthiring and look for work elsewhere.Ecology; Giff live about 70 years, but do not age gracefully. As agift grows older and begins to slow down, he is possessed withthe idea of proving himself still young and vital, usually in battle.As a result, there are very, very few* old giff.
The gith are a race ot grotesque humanoids that appear to be apeculiar mixture of elf and reptile. They are extremely gaunt andlanky with long gangling arms and spindly legs. Their handshave three fingers with no opposable thumbs, yet they are able touse tools and wield weapons. Their fingers and toes end in sharpdaws. If one could get a gith to stand up straight, he would mea¬sure dose to 7 feet talk However most gith appear to be no morethan 5 feet tall, for they always stand hunched over at the shoul¬ders. in a permanent slouch.Combat: It possible, the gith attack in mass, usually starting witha psionie attack by one of their leaders. Then the entire partycharges quickly into melee. Their main charge is often accom¬plished by springing up to 20 feet in one giant leap to close withtheir enemies. When they employ this spring, it gives them a +2THACO bonus on the first round of combat.The gith are usually armed with large, wicked-looking spearsthat have giant, razor-sharp heads of polished obsidian (ld6-ldamage). Although these spears look like thrusting weapons,they are used primarily to slash or chop, The gith often armorthemselves, and especially their vulnerable backs, with inix-shellarmor (AC t>) of their own manufacture*Level Dis/Sti Dev Attack/Defense Score PSPs5 2/3/10 HUT/ 16 60• Telepathy—Sciences: tower of iron will, project force. Devo¬tions: id insinuation, mind thrust, contact, mind blank, mentalbarrier.• Psychokinesis—Sciences; telekinesis. Devotions: animate ob¬ject, animate shadow, ballistic attack, control body controlflames.Note: Only leaders commanding 25 or more gith have psioniepowers. The psionics listed above are representative of theseleaders, but their powers do vary greatly Gith with more HitDice have correspondingly greater powers.Habitat Society: The gith live in tribal organizations. The indi¬vidual with the most powerful psionics generally acts as the lead¬er* All other social positions are distributed at his pleasure.For every twenty-five gith. there will be a 5 HD leader, for eve¬ry fifty a 6 HD leader, and for every tribe of 100 or more a 7 HDleader. In addition to having hit points and THACO numbers ap¬propriate to their HD, these leaders will have psionie powers ap¬proximately equal to a psionirist of an equivalent level.Some of these leaders are priests. While little is known of thegith religion, shamans up to the 4th level are known to accompa¬ny and sometimes lead gith tribes. There have also been reportsof gith wizards (defilers) ranked at the 6th level. Even if true. 6thlevel would be unusual for gith. but wizards of up to 4th levelhave been reported by reliable witnesses.Not much is known about the reproductive cycle of the gith. Itis known that they are egg layers; females lay approximately ld6eggs in a clutch. It is rumored that the gith operate hatcheriescontaining hundreds (some say thousands) of nests.Ecology: Mountain gith live in underground lairs, claiming a par¬ticular canyon or valley as their territory. Gith inhabiting table¬lands tend to organize their society more along the lines of anomadic hunting clan, going wherever the game takes them.They do not hesitate to attack human or demihuman groups, forthey view humans and demihumans as a choice food supply, pre¬ferring it over other flesh. They will even attack thri-kreen, ifthey are hungry enough, but the msectoids taste bad. and usuallyescape gith raiders.
20-40/ As ship crew0127-11SpecialVariesBy weaponSee belowSee belowWhen the githyanki. under their liberator, Gith, freed themselvesfrom the yoke of mindflayer slavery this branch of the race flednot to the Astral plane, but to arcane space.Tall, emaciated beings, the pirates of Gith appear as almostskeletal humanoids with skin varying from dirty gray to dull yehlow. Long, dingy-brown hair flows down their backs and overthe ornate, bejeweled arms and armor they prefer to use.Combat: The pirates of Gith can operate as fighters, mages, orfighter mages, with limits of 11 in each class. Typically thehighest-level fighter captains the ship. This frees all the mages(single-and mukidassed) for spelljammmg or combat duty.Clerics of Gith are occasionally encountered as well (limit of11 th level). Rarely, a fighter/ cleric is encountered, almost alwaysas the captain of its ship.When dosing with a foe. the pirates use spells and any arma¬ment their ship possesses. In melee, they use a variety of weap¬ons, with swords predominating.Operating from small bases hidden on asteroids, the piratesStrive to capture any ship that is larger, faster, or better armedthan theirs. They feverishly attempt to capture any elven-madeships that come their way (see below). As a result, many elvenarmadas post large bounties on the heads of Gith pirates.The pirates' greatest fury is reserved for the illithids, however.The pirates- of Gith spare no expense to kill all mindflayers theyfind, No Gith pirate ever uses a captured illithid ship,A ship's complement varies, but these numbers are a generalguideline:1 Captain (highest-level fighter or fighter/cleric)I Chief Spell jammer or Warlock (highest-level mage)The rest of the crew is evenly divided among the three commonclass possibilities.the pecking order in a settlement. This explains the pirates' con¬stant quest for better ships. Each settlement is ruled by force byits best ship, or a coalition of the best ships.Extreme isolationists, the pirates of Gith live with no otherraces—they may even try to commit genocide on a race that set¬tles too close to them. Over all despite being pirates, these Githlive a structured, militaristic lifestyle.Every adult member of this race possesses the following magi¬cal abilities, each usable three times a day: astral spell planeshift, and ESP. All function as the spell of the same name (as castby the lowest-level caster possible). These inherent abilities alsoenable the pirates to pilot ships with series helms. These abilitiesfunction only in wildspace. not in the phlogiston.The most dangerous aspect of this race is the combination ofthe above abilities, the properties of major and minor spelljam¬ming helms, and the unique organic structure of the elven-madeships. When a Gith pirate is at the helm of an elven-made ship(flitter, etc, ), he may use his plane shift and astral spell abilities toshunt the entire ship, and all its contents, to the Astral plane (thisuses up that pirate's astral spell and plane shift abilities for theday). This gives the pirates an escape route, and it enables themto wait in known shipping lanes, astrally hidden, before return¬ing to the Prime Material plane to launch an attack. The Githpirates can use only elven-made ships of less than 50 tons in thismanner.This special maneuver only works in wtldspace, not in thephlogiston. That is certainly the reason the Gith pirates neverpursue prey into that medium.Habitat Society: The pirate philosophy carries over into all as¬pects of life. The strongest take what they want. Each ship is veryimportant to Its crew, as it is the primary factor in determiningEcology? The Gith pirates are carnivores, pure and simple. Theydo not care what state, short of putrefied, the meat is in. Some ofthe pirate bands also engage in cannibalism.
Exceptional to genius (1548)Individuals R; Lair HAny evil12 , 96 on Astral planePer class and levelPer class and levelPer dass and levelPer weapon typeGithyanki are an ancient race descended from humans. Theydwell upon the Astral plane but will often leave that plane tomake war on other races. They are engaged in a lengthy war withthe githzerai.Githyanki are strongly humanoid in appearance. They are ap¬proximately of human height but tend to be much more gauntand long of limb. They have rough, yellow skin and gleamingblack eyes that instantly betray their mhumanness. Like manydemihuman races, their ears have sharp points and are serratedat the back. Dress for the githyanki is always an elaborate affair.Their baroque armor and weapons of war are decorated withfeathers, beads, and precious metals and gems.Combat: The githyanki have had long years to perfect the art olwar. Their very existence attests to their battle prowess. Each in¬dividual githyanki has a character class and level from which arederived such things as THACO, armor class, spell use, etc.
The armor for each githyanki varies according to class. Magesand illusionists have AC 10. Fighters and fighter mages have dif¬fering armor—AC 5 to AC 0 (6 - ld6). Knights have AC 0.Githyanki have Hit Dice according to their class and level, andtheir hit points are rolled normally. Their THACO is determinedper dass and level, as w T elh Fighters, fighter/mages, and knightsmay receive more than one attack per round—other githyankihave one attack per round.Githyanki knights are evil champions who take up the causesof the githyankis mysterious lich-queen, Githyanki knights arevery powerful and highly revered in their society. Githyankiknights have all of the powers and abilities of a human paladinexcept these are turned toward evil ie,g. detect good instead ofdetect evil, command undead instead of turning undeai etc,),Githyanki mages, fighter/mages, and illusionists will receiveall the spells available at their level of experience, Spells shouldbe determined randomly keeping in mind that they are by naturecreatures of destruction—offensive spells should be favored.The githyanki soldiers use arms and armor similar to humans,however these are normally highly decorated and have becomealmost religious artifacts. A githyanki would likely show greatercare for his weapons and armor than he would toward his mate.Half of the githyanki fighters, fighter/mages, or knights thatprogress to 5th level receive a magical two-handed sword +1,the remainder using normal two-handed swords, Githyankifighters of 7th level and above are 60% likely to carry a fangsmord *2. Knights of 7th level and above will always carry asilver sword —a tiuo -handed sword +3 that, if used astrally hasa 5% chance per hit of cutting an opponent's silver cord (see TheAstral Plane, DMG page 132), but mind barred individuals areimmune, A supreme leader of a lair will carry a special silversword that is +5 with all the abilities of a vorpal thatGithyanki will never willingly allow a silver sword to fall intothe hands of a nongithyankL If a special si/oer sword should fallinto someone's hands, very powerful raiding parties will beformed to recover the sword. Failure to recover one of thesehighly prized weapons surely means instant death to all the gith¬yanki involved at the hands of their merciless lich-queen.All githyanki have the natural ability to plane shift at will.They will rarely travel anywhere besides back and forth from theAstral plane to the Prime Material plane.Habitat Society: History provides some information on thegithyanki—their race is both ancient and reclusive. Sages believe
they once were humans that were captured by mind flayers toserve as slaves and cattle. The mind flayers treated their humanslaves cruelly and the people harbored a deep resentment towardthe diithids. For centuries these humans increased their hatredbut could not summon the strength necessary to break tree. Sothey waited for many years, developing their power in secret,waking for an opportunity strike out against their masters.Finally a woman of power came forth among them, a delivererby the name of Gith. She convinced the people to rise up againsttheir cruel masters. The struggle was long and vicious, but even¬tually the people freed themselves. They had earned their free¬dom and become the githyanki, ( which, in their tongue, meanssons of Gith),These astral beings progress through levels exactly as a humanwould. However, there has never been a githyanki that has pro¬gressed beyond the 13 th level of experience and very few prog¬ress beyond Pth. When a githyanki advances to 9th level, he istested by the lich-queen. This grueling test involves survival inone of lower planes for a number of weeks. Failure quite obvi¬ously results in death, Githyanki that reach 12 th level of experi¬ence are immediately drawn out of the Astral plane and into thepresence of the lich-queen where their life force is drawn to feedthe ravenous hunger of the cruel demi-goddess,Githyanki dwell in huge castles on the Astral plane. These or¬nately decorated castles are avoided by all other dwellers on theAstral plane for the githyanki are infamous for being inhospita¬ble to strangers.A githyanki stronghold will be ruled by a supreme leader. Thisleader will be a fighter mage of lOth 8th level or 11th 9th level.The supreme leader is the undisputed overlord of the castle withthe power of life and death over all who dwell there. A typicalleader will be equipped with 2-8 random magical items in addi¬tion to the weapons described above.All castles have a retinue of 20-80 knights of 9th level that serve asthe supreme leaders elite shock troops. They are fanatically loyal.There will also be up to l r 000 githyanki of lesser status.Githyanki, having the ability to plane shift at will, often travelto the Prime Material plane These treks across the planes oftenlead to the formation of underground lairs used to mount surfaceraids, though their hatred is more often directed against mindflayers. Outside the war with the githxerai, these raids are con¬ducted largely for the perverse pleasure of the kill.A typical githyanki lair on the Prime Material plane will con¬tain the followingsOne knightTwo warlocksThree sergeantsTwo gisfT2CF50 lower levels8 th-Ievd fighter and 7th/6th-levelfighter/mage8 th levelmages of 4th/7th levelfighters of 4th/7th levelfighter-mages of 4th/4th leveldetermined randomly using the tableabove, of 1st-3rd levelOn the Prime Material plane, githyanki have a pact with agroup of red dragons. These proud creatures will act as mountsand companions to the githyanki- When encountered on thePrime Material plane and outside their lair, a githyanki groupwill typically consist of the following:Such a group will have two red dragons as steeds, transportingbetween four and six githyanki per dragon. The dragons willfight for the safety and well-being of the githyanki but will notdirectly risk their lives, fleeing when the battle is turned againstthem. Just what the githyanki offer the red dragons in return forthese services is unknown.An interesting aspect of githyanki society is the apparent bondbetween military leaders and their subordinates, This bond al¬lows a leader to give his men short, almost senseless commands(to human standards) and actually relay complex and exactingmessages. Although this has no actual affect during the meleeround, it often leads to more effective ambushes and attacks andallows complex military decisions to be relayed quickly.Ecology: Githyankis have similar ecology to that of humans.However, the Astral plane does not offer the same type of envi¬ronments as the Prime Material plane, so their cultural groupsare much different. In a society where farmers and tradesmen areunnecessary, more unique, specialized groups have evolved.G'lathk: The g'lathk, (admittedly nearly unpronounceable inhuman tongues) are the equivalent of farmers. Due to the barren¬ness of the Astral plane, the githyanki are forced to grow food invast, artificial chambers. They rely upon a variety of fungi andother plants that require no sunlight to grow. The glathk arealso experts in aquatic plantlife, sometimes tending giganticwater-gardens.Mlar: Not all magic-using githyanki ever attain the power andself-discipline necessary to become wizards. Some use their magi¬cal talents in the field of architecture and construction, The mlarare such individuals, focusing their creative energies toward de¬signing and constructing the buildings and structures used in day-to-day life in githyanki society. The mlar have developed theirjobs into an art form.HrVtknir: The Astral plane has many strange energies mov¬ing through it. Some of these energies are obvious to the senses,such as heat and light, Others are not so easily observed. Thereare many psychic and strange astral energies that humans gener¬ally are not aware of. Being a psychically aware race, however,the githyanki cannot only sense these energies, but harness themtoo. The hr'a'cknir are the collectors of those energies. They aresimilar to the mlar, in that they use innate magical powers to per¬form their crafts*More than humans, githyanki are hunters and predators. Theywill typically engage in raiding and plundering seemingly for thejoy they derive from it. It is likely that the long centuries of en¬slavement of their race has caused the githyanki to bully thoseweaker than themselves.Unlike humans, though, the githyanki never war amongstthemselves. The split of the githyanki and the githzerai (q,o.) isthe closest thing the gith races have known to civil war. Githy-anki never battles githyanki. It is the unwritten rule of gith socie¬ty and is never broken* This, too, may be an effect of the race'senslavement.Exceptional to genius (15-18)Individual P; Lair H * 2Chaotic neutral
Githzerai are the monastic, chaotic neutral counterparts to thegithvanki iq.v. h The two races share a stretch of time in history;the githzerai are the lesser and more repressed offshoot of theoriginal people that the warrior Gith helped to escape the slaveryof the mind flayers millennia ago.Githzerai are very similar in appearance to their githyankicousins, although they tend to look much more human. Theirfeatures are for the most part unremarkable, with vaguely noblecountenance. Their skin tone is that of human Caucasian flesh.Githzerai dress simply, wearing functional clothing and favoringconservafive tones.Combat The githzerai are unadorned and ruthlessly straightfor¬ward with their combat and magic. Their strong resistance to magicseems to make up for their generally inferior fighting ability.
The armor for each githzerai varies according to class. Mageshave AC 10. Fighters and fighter mages have differing armor—AC 5 to AC 0 (6 —Idfr). Thieves have AC 7.Githzerai have Hit Dice according to their class and level, andtheir hit points are rolled normally, Their THACO is determinedper class and level, as well. Fighters and fighter/mages may re¬ceive more than one attack per round—other githzerai have oneattack per round.On rare occasions, a githzerai will progress as a thief. Thesethieves seem to have some significance to the strange githzeraireligion. Although they are never known to become leaders inany capacity these thieves are an exception to the maximumlevel of 9th, often progressing up to 12th level of experience. Justwhat role these thieves play is unknown.Githzerai fighters of at least 5th level have use of silver swords.These magical weapons are two-handedsivonb + 3 that, if usedin the Astral plane, have a 5% chance of cutting an opponent'ssilver cord upon scoring a hit (see The Astral Plane, DMG. page132), though mind barred individuals are immune. These weap¬ons are of powerful religious value to the githzerai and they willnever willingly allow them to fall into the hands of outsiders. Ifthis happens, the githzerai will go to great ends to recover theweapon.All githzerai have the innate power to plane shift to any plane.This is rarely done except to travel back and forth to the PrimeMaterial plane where the githzerai have several fortresses.Habitat/Society: The githzerai were originally offspring of a raceof humans that were freed from slavery under mind flayers by agreat female warrior named Gith. These men and women didnot, however, choose to follow Giths ways after they revoltedagainst their slavers. Instead, they fell sway to the teachings of apowerful wizard who proclaimed himself king—and later, god—of the people. The githzerai then separated themselves from thegithyanki, beginning a great racial war that has endured the longmillennia without diminishing.Githzerai can progress as fighters, mages, or fighter mages,and thieves. They will rarely attain levels above 7th and, in anycase, will never progress beyond 9th, The githzerai, who worshipa powerful and ancient wizard as though he were a god (he isnot), are destroyed before they have enough power to become athreat to their rulerIf encountered outside of their lair, githzerai will usually be inthe following numbers;
6 th-leve) fighter or 4th/4thdevelfighter'magemages of 3rd-5th levelfighters of 3rd-5lh levelfighter mages of 3rd 3rd levelevenly distributed between thethree possible classes and of 1st-3rd levelA thief, ii present (10% chance); wiJI replace one of the lowerlevel githzerai and will be of 6th* 10th level.The githzerai dwell primarily on the plane of Umbo. Theyhave mighty fortresses in that plane of chaos and their positionthere ts very strong. Typically one of these fortresses containsapproximately 3,000 githzerai led by a single supreme leader.This leader has absolute control over the githzerai; including thepowers of life and death.The githzerai hold only a few fortresses on the Prime Materialplane, but these are particularly strong holdings, with walls ofadamantite rising as huge squat towers trom dusty plains. Eachhouses approximately 500 githzerai, including a supreme leadenOn Limbo, however, the githzerai presence is very strong. Liv¬ing in cities typically of 100,000 or more, the gi thzerai enjoy totalpower over themselves on an otherwise chaotic and unpredicta¬ble plane. One notable example of this is the city Shra'fcf lor. Thislarge githzerai capital is composed of some 2,000,000 githzerailiving in great power. Shra'kf lor serves as both a capital and as aheadquarters for all githzerai military matters. The greatest gen¬erals and nobles of the race meet here to plan githzerai strategyfor battling both the githyanki and the mind flayers. There islikely no force on Limbo that could readily threaten the power ofShra'ktlor or its many inhabitants.Gne of the prime motivations among the githzerai is their warwith the githyanki. These offshoots of Gith s original race are ob¬sessed with this war of extermination. They often employ merce¬naries on the Prime Material plane to aid them in battling thegithyanki The evil, destructive nature of the githyanki makesthe hiring of mercenaries to right them a relatively simple task.Legend of the Zerthimon: In githzerai lore there is a central fig¬ure that is revered above all others—Zerthimon, The githyankibelieve him to be a great god that was once a man. According togithzerai lore, when the original race broke free of the mind flay¬ers. it was Zerthimon that opposed Gith, claiming that she washateful and unfit to lead the people.There ensued a great battle and the people were polarized bythe two powers. Those that chose to support Gith became thegithyanki. Those that supported Zerthimon became the githze-rai,Zerthimon died in the battle, but in his sacrifice he freed thegithzerai from Gith. The githzerai believe that someday Zerthi¬mon, in his new godly form, will return and take the them to aplace on another plane.Zerths are special among the githzerai. acting as focal pointsfor the attention of Zerthimon. The githzerai believe that whenZerthimon returns for them, he will first gather all of the zerthsand lead them to their new paradise. It might be said that thezerths are the center of githzerai religion. Unfortunately, they arenot free from religious persecution.The wizard-king (whose name is not known) that rules overthe highly superstitious githzerai would like very much to stampouL the legend of Zerthimon. The wizard-king believes that thislegend challenges his authority and very likely it does. However,he has never been able to rid the githzerai of this legend and he isnow forced to tolerate it.Rrakkma bands: Although the githzerai are not a bitter oroverly violent race, they still tend to hold a strong enmity andhatred for the race of illithids that originally enslaved the githrace so many thousands of years ago. By human terms, that maybe a very long time to hold a grudge, but the githzerai see themind flayers as the cause of the split of the Gith race and much ofthe hardships the githzerai are forced to endure. Thus largerrakkma {in the githzerai tongue) bands are often formed to huntmind flayers. These bands typically consist of 30-60 githzeraiwarriors led by the githzerai equivalent of a sergeant. For rough¬ly three months, these bands will roam the outer and innerplanes, searching for groups of illithids and destroying them ut¬terly. The rrakkma bands are very popular in githzerai societyand it is considered to be an honor to serve in one.The githzerai fortresses on the Prime Material plane tend to bevery large affairs with great, impenetrable walls. Wherever thesefortresses stand, they destroy the landscape for miles. No plantsor animals live within many miles of the fortresses and the land isreduced to wasteland around them. It is not known if the effect isjust the land's reaction to the *'other-planar'' stuff of which thecastles are constructed, or if githzerai mages magically producethe effect in order to keep material beings away from these for¬tresses.The most likely purpose of these fortresses cm the Prime Mate¬rial plane is to keep tabs on the githyanki . The githzerai, not be¬ing a particularly war-mongering or violent race, have no desireto conquer the Prime Material plane like the githyanki do. How¬ever, the githzerai realize that if their enemies have a strong holdon the Prime Material plane, they will become more powerfuland thus will hold power over them. The githzerai carefully mon¬itor the progress on the githyanki and lead coordinated, focusedstrikes against strongpomts of the githyanki, thus hamperingtheir ability to expand and grow in the Prime Material plane.During these attacks, the githzerai will not intentionally attackthe natural denizens of the Prime Material plane (humans, demi-humans, humanoids, etc.), but they will never sacrifice a well-planned attack on the githyanki just to preserve life. With thegithzerai, the ends will always justify the means.Like the githyanki, the githzerai really have no part m theBlood War ) of the fiends. They seldom venture to the lowerplanes, and only then for matters of absolute importance. Thegithzerai find the bloodthirsty destructive nature of the fiends tobe distasteful, so they will typically not deal with those creaturesfor any reason. They coexist with the sbadl, and githzerai arerumored to have mental powers beyond those described here.Ecology: For as long as men have known of the ability to travelthe planes, they have wondered at the natural power of thegithzerai to wander from plane to plane at will. Although manand githzerai are not natural enemies, battles are frequentlyfought between the two races, due in part to some humans desireto capture a live githzerai for study. To date, no such creature hasbeen secured,The creature commonly called the gloomwing is the adult stageof the tenebrous worm (see below). These huge moths are nativeto the demi-plane of Shadow, Their bodies and wings are cov-ered with shimmering, geometric patterns of black and silver.They have large, fern-like black antennae tipped with white andeight legs each ending in a pearly daw.Combat: A gloomwings shimmering markings make it a difficulttarget. Any creature viewing the moth squarely from above orbelow must success!ully save vs, spells or be confused , as the 4th-level mage spell, for 5-8 (ld4 +4) rounds. The markings also pro¬vide excellent camouflage, and the moth is 50% undetectable indarkness, twilight, or moonlight. Successfully camouflagedgloomwings cannot cause confusion -When attacking in darkness or near darkness, a gloomwing re-ceives a -2 bonus to its surprise roll Gloom wings normallyswoop to the attack This gives them a + 2 attack bonus andallows them to seize and carry away victims less than 3 feet talland that weigh less than 62 pounds. Such victims are securelyheld in the moth's eight claws w hile the moth attacks each roundwith a + 4 attack bonus and a + 2 bonus to damage. When fight¬ing creatures too large to carry away, the moth hovers, biting andflailing with its two front claws.During the second and each successive round of combat, themoth emits a potent pheromone that can attract othergloomwings and can cause weakness in any non-insect. Theweakness effect has a 25-toot radius and exposed creatures mustsuccessfully save vs poison or lose 1 point of Strength eachround they remain in the area of effect. Creatures who are suc¬cessful with their initial save need not save again if exposure con¬tinues, Multiple gloomwings do not require multiple saves. LostStrength points are recovered at the rate of 1 per turn, beginningld4 hours after exposure stops. Creatures reduced to 0 Strengthlose consciousness until they regain at least 1 point of Strength.There is a 20% chance each round that an additional Id4gloomwings will arrive at the end of any round when one ormore gloomwings are emitting this strong scent. If they do ar¬rive, they will join in combating any opponents.Habitat/Society: Gloom wing moths arc short-lived, solitary'hunters. They use a variety of pheromones to ward off ri vals andto find mates. They form groups, but only to attack large prey,and then only when drawn to the fray by the combat phero¬mone. When two gloomwings of the same sex meet they flee un¬less there is combat pheromone in the air.Ecology: Gloomwing moths live only 4-9 (ld6 + 3) weeks, Duringthis time they search for mates and eat voraciously. Egg-ladenfemales fVz chance) use corpses of small sized or larger creaturesas incubators tor their eggs. The eggs hatch in 12 days, sproutingld6 + 4 small tenebrous worms. The corpse cannot be resurrectedunless the infestation is removed with a cure disease spell first.Unless killed, the young worms completely devour the bodywhen they emerge.These natives of the demi-plane of Shadow resemble giant cater¬pillars. In combat, they strike with powerful mandibles and any¬one bitten by the worm must roll a successful saving throw vs.poison, with a penalty, or suffer double damage from the tox¬ic bite. The head and upper body are covered with poisonousbristles that inflict ld4 points of damage to anyone whose bareskin comes into contact with them. A successful saving throw vs.poison is required to avoid paralysis for ld4 rounds after con¬tact. At the end of that time, the victim dies unless a neutralizepoison or s/ou? potsoii spell is administered. The chance of at¬tackers being hit by the spines is equal to 10% times their baseArmor Class (before shield and Dexterity modifiers). Attackingthe worm's head reduces the chance of contact by 20% (but onlyone character can attack the head at a time). The mandibles ofthis worm are attractive and worth from 1,000 to 3,000gold piec¬es per set.
Gnolls are large, evil p hyena-like humanoids that roam about inloosely organized bands.While the body of a gnoll is shaped like that of a large human,the details are those of a hyena. They stand erect on two legs andhave hands that can manipulate as well as those of any human.They have greenish gray skin, darker near the muzzle, with ashort reddish gray to dull yellow mane,Gnolls have their own language and many also speak thetongues ol llinds, trolls, ores, or hobgoblins.Combat? Gnolls seek to overwhelm their opponents by sheernumbers, using horde tactics. When under the direction of fluidsor a strong leader, they can be made to hold rank and fight as aunit. While they do not often lay traps, they will ambush or at¬tempt to attack from a flank or rear position. Gnolls favorswords (15%), pole arms (35%) and battle axes 120%) in combat,but also use bows (15%), momingstars (15%).HabitatSociety: Gnolls are most often encountered under¬ground or inside abandoned ruins. When above ground they op¬erate primarily at night. Gnoll society is ruled by the strongest,using fear and intimidation. When found underground, they willhave (30% chance) 1-3 trolls as guards and servants. Aboveground they keep pets (65% of the time) such as 4-16 hyenas(80%) or 2-12 hyaenodons ( 20 %) which can act as guards,A gnoll lair will contain between 20 and 200 adult males. Forevery 20 gnolls, there will be a 3 Hit Die leaden if 1 00 or more areencountered there will also be a chieftain who has 4 Hit Dice, anArmor Class of 3 , and who receives a +3 on his damage rolls dueto his great strength. Further, each chieftain will be protected by2-12 ( 2 d 6 l elite warrior guards of 3 Hit Dice (AC 4, +2 damage).In a lair, there will be females equal to half the number ofmales. Females are equal to males in combat, though not usuallyas well armed or armored. There will also be twice as manyyoung as there are adults in the lair, but they do not fight, Gnollsalways have at least 1 slave for every 10 adults in the lair, andmay have many more.Gnolls will work together with ores, hobgoblins, bugbears,ogres, and trolls, U encountered as a group, there must be a rela¬tive equality of strength. Otherwise the gnolls will kill and eattheir partners (hunger comes before friendship or fear) or bekilled and eaten by them. They dislike goblins, kobolds, giants,humans, demi-humans and any type of manual labor.Ecology: Gnolls eat anything warm blooded, favoring intelli¬gent creatures over animals because they scream better. They willcompletely hunt out an area before moving on. It may take sev¬eral years for the game to return, When allowed to die of old age,the typical gnoll lives to be about 35 years old.The flind is similar to a gnoll in body style, though it is a littleshorter, and broader. They are more muscular than their cousins.Short, dirty, brown and red fur covers their body. Their fore¬heads do not slope back as far, and their ears are rounded, butstill animat like.Rinds use dubs (75%) which inflict 1-6 points of damage andflindbars (25%) which do 1-4 points of damage. A flindbar is apair of chain-linked iron bars which are spun at great speed. Aflind with a flindbar can strike twice per round. Each successfulhit requires the victim to save vs + wands or have his weapon en¬tangled in the chain and torn from his grasp by the flindbar. Dueto their great strength, Hinds get a +1 on their attack rolls.Flinds are regarded with reverence and awe by gnolls. Flindleaders are 3 + 3 Hit Dice, at least 13 intelligence and 18 charismato gnolls (15 to flinds), and always use flindbars.
Small cousins of the dwarves, gnomes are friendly but reticent,quick to help their friends but rarely seen by other races unlessthey want to be They tend to dwell underground in hilly wood¬ed regions where they can pursue their interests in peace.Gnomes can be fighters or priests, but most prefer to becomethieves or illusionists instead. Multi-class characters are morecommon among the gnomes than any other demihuman race.Gnomes strongly resemble small thin, nimble dwarves, withthe exception of two notable facial features: gnomes prefer tokeep their beards short and stylishly-trimmed, and they takepride in their enormous noses (often fully twice the size of anydwarf or human's). Skin. hair, and eye color vary somewhat bysubrace: the most common type of gnome, the Rock Gnome, hasskin ranging from a dark tan to a woody brown (sometimes witha hint of gray), pale hair, and eyes any shade of blue. Gnomishclothing lends toward leather and earth tones, brightened by abit of intricately wrought jewelry or stitching. Rock gnomes havean average life span of around 450 years, although some live tobe 600 years or more.Gnomes speak their own language, and each subrace has itsown distinctive dialect. Many gnomes learn the tongues of hu¬mans. kobolds, goblins, halflings, and dwarves in order to com¬municate with their neighbors, and some Rock Gnomes are ableto communicate with burrowing mammals via a basic languageof grunts, snorts, and signs.Gnomes posses infravision to 60 feet, and the ability to detectsloping passages (1-5 on ld6) r unsate stonework (1-7 on IdlO),and approximate depth (1-4 on ld6) and direction (1-3 on ld6)underground. They are highly resistant to magic, gaining a +1bonus to their saving throws for each 5.5 points of Constitution{a typical gnome will have a bonus oi + 3 to + 4). Unfortunately,Lhis also means that there is a 20% chance that any magical itema gnome attempts to use will malfunction (armor, weapons, andillusionary items exempted).Combat: Gnomes prefer the use of strategy over brute force incombat and will often use illusions in imaginative ways to eventhe odds. Their great hatred of kobolds and goblins, their tradi¬tional enemies, gives them a +1 on their attack rolls when fight¬ing these beings. They are adept at dodging the attacks of largeopponents, forcing all giant class creatures (gnoils, bugbears,ogres, trolls, giants, etc.) to subtract 4 from their attack rollswhen fighting gnomes.Gnomes can use any weapon that matches their size and oftencarry a second (or even a third) weapon as a back-up* Shortsw r ords, hammers, and spears are favorite melee weapons* withshort bows, crossbows, slings, and darts coming into play whendistance weapons are called for: virtually every gnome will alsocarry a sharp knife somewhere on his or her person as a final lineof defense.A typical rock gnome will wear studded leather armor and usea small shield (AC 6). Their leaders will have chain mail (AC 4).and any gnome above 5th level has plate mail (AC 2). There is a10% chance for each level above 5th that the gnomes armorand/or weapon is magical (roU separately for each). Spell castershave a 10% chance per level of having 1-3 magical items usableby their character class.Habitat Society: Gnomes live In underground burrows in remotehilly, wooded regions. They are clannish, with friendly rivalriesoccurring between neighboring clans. They spend their lives min¬ing, crafting fine jewelry, and enjoying the fruits of their labors.Gnomes work hard, and they play hard. They observe many fes¬tivals and holidays, which usually involve games, nose measur¬ing contests, and swapping of grand tales. Their society is wellorganized, with many levels of responsibility, culminating in asingle chief who is advised by clerics in matters directly relatingto their calling.A gnomish lair is home to some 40-400 (4d!0 * 10) gnomes,one-quarter of them children. For every 40 adults there is a fight¬er of 2nd to 4th level If 160 or more are encountered there is alsoa Sth-ievd chief and a 3rd-Ievel lieutenant, if 200 or more aremet, there is a cleric or illusionist of 4th to 6th level If 320 ormore are present, add a 6th-leve! fighter, two 5th-level fighters, a7th-!evel cleric, four 3rd-level clerics, a 5th-level illusionist, andtwo 2nd-level illusionists. Gnomes often befriend burrowingmammals, so 5d6 badgers (70%), 3d4 giant badgers (20%), or2d4 wolverines (10%) will be present as well These animals areneither pets nor servants, but allies who will help guard the clan.Ecology: Gnomes are very much a magical part of nature, exist¬ing in harmony with the land they inhabit. They choose to liveunderground but remain near the surface in order to enjov itsbeauty.Far beneath the surface of the earth dwell the Svirfneblin, or DeepGnomes. Small parties of these demlhumans roam the Underdark'smaies of small passageways searching for gemstones. They are saidto dwell in great cities consisting of a closely connected series of tun¬nels, buildings, and caverns in which up to a thousand of these di¬minutive creatures live. They keep the location of these hidden dtiessecret in order to protect them from their deadly foes, the kuo-toa.Drew, and mind flayers.Svirfneblin are slightly smaller than rock gnomes, but theirthin, wiry gnarled frames are just as strong. Their skin is rock-colored, usually medium brown to brownish gray and their eyesare gray. Male svirfneblin are completely bald; female deepgnomes have stringy gray hair. The average svirfneblin life spanis 250 years,Svirfneblin mining teams and patrols work together sosmoothly that to outside observers they appear to communicatewith each other by some form of racial empathy. They speaktheir own dialect of gnomish that other gnomish subraces are60% likely to understand. Most deep gnomes are also able toconverse in Underworld Common and speak and understand afair amount of kuo-toan and drow. These small folk can alsoconverse with any creature from the elemental plane of Earth viaa curious language' consisting solely of vibrations (each pitchconveys a different message3. although only on a very basiclevel.All svirfneblin have the innate ability to cast blindness, blur tand change self once per day Deep gnomes also radiate non¬detection identical to the spell of the same name. Deep gnomeshave 120-foot infravision, as well as all the detection abilities ofrock gnomes.Combat: Despite their metal armor and arms, these quick, smallfolk are able to move very quietly Deep gnomes are able to'freeze in place for long periods without any hint of movement,making them 60% unlikely to be seen by any observer, eventhose with in fra vision. They are surprised only on a roll of 1 onIdlOdue to their keen hearing and smelling abilities and surpriseopponents 90% of the time.The deep gnomes w-ear leather jacks sewn with rings or scalesof mithral steel alloy over fine chainmad shirts, giving a typicalsvirfneblin warrior an Armor Class of 2. They do not usuallycarry shields, since these w p ould hinder movement through thenarrow 1 corridors they favor. For every level above 3rd, a DeepGnome's Armor Class improves by one point—-a 4th-Ievel deepgnome has AC X, a 5th-level deep gnome, AC 0; to a maximumof AC 6.All deep gnomes are 20% magic resistant, gaining an extra+ 5% magic resistance for each level they attain above 3rd. Theyare immune to illusions, phantasms, and hallucinations. Becauseof their high wisdom speed, and agility they make aH savingthrows at +3, except against poison, when their bonus is +2.Deep Gnomes are typically armed with a pick and a daggerwhich, while nonmagical, gain a +1 bonus to attacks and dam¬age due to their finely-honed edges. Svirfneblin also carry ld4 + 6special stun dnrfs, throwing them to a range of 40 feet, with a +2bonus to hit. Each dart releases a small puff of gas when it strikes;any creature inhaling the gas must save vs. poison or bosrimnedfor 1 round and stowed for the next four rounds. Elite warriors(3rd level and above) often carry hollow darts with acid Inside( + 2cl4 to damage) and crystal caltrops which, when stepped on rrelease a powerful steep gas.Habitat Society: Svirfneblin society is strictly divided betweenthe sexes; females are in charge of food production and runningthe city while males patrol its borders and mine for preciousstones. A svirfneblin city will have both a king and a queen, eachof whom is independent and has his or her own sphere of respon*sibility. Since only males ever leave the city, the vast majority ofencounters will be with deep gnome mining parties seeking fornew lodes. For every four svirfneblin encountered, there will bean overseer with 4 + 7 Hit Dice, Groups of more than 20 will beled by a burrow warden 16 + 9 Hit Dice) with two Sthdevd assist¬ants (5 + 8 Hit Dice).It is 25% probable that a 6th-levd deep gnome will have illu¬sionist abilities of 5th, 6th. or 7th level. Deep Gnomes who arenot illusionists gain the ability at 6th level to summon an earthelemental 150% chance of success) once per day. Deep gnomeclerics have no ability to turn undead.Ecology: Stealth, cleverness, and tenacity enable the svirfneblinto survive in the extremely hostile environment of the Under¬dark. They love gems, especially rubies, and will take great risksin order to gain them. Their affinity for stone is such that crea¬tures from the elemental plane of Earth are 90% unlikely to harma deep gnome, though they might demand a hefty tithe in gems orprecious metals for allowing the gnome to escape.Cheerful, industrious, and inept, tinker gnomes originated onRrynn, but they have spread to many other worlds via spell jam¬ming ships. Physically similar to rock gnomes, even to the extentof sharing the same infravision range, magic resistance, combatbonuses, and detection abilities, their history and culture axe soradically different as to qualify them tor consideration as a sepa¬rate subrace.
Graceful and quick in their movements, tinker gnomes handsare deft and sure. Tinkers have rich brown skin, white hair, andchina-blue or violet eyes. Males favor oddly-styled beards andmoustaches, and both sexes have rounded ears and typicallylarge gnomish noses. Tinkers who avoid getting blown up in anexperiment live for 250-300 years.Tinker gnomes speak very rapidly, running their words togeth¬er in sentences that never seem to end. They are capable of talk¬ing and listening at the same time: when two tinkers meet, theybabble away, answering questions asked by the other as part ofthe same continuous sentence,Combatt Tinker gnomes rarely carry weapons, although some oftheir ever present tools can be pressed into service at need. How¬ever they delight in invention and are always devising strangeweapons of dubious utility from the three barrel water blaster tothe multiple spear fllnger. Tinkers can wear any type of armorbut typically outfit themselves in a variety of mismatched piecesfor an effective AC of 5.Habitat Society: Tinker gnomes establish colonies consisting ofimmense tunnel complexes in secluded mountain ranges. Thelargest gnome settlement on Krynn, beneath Mount Nevermind,is home to some 59,000 tinkers. Other tinker gnome colonies ex¬ist, both on Krynn and elsewhere, but their populations seldomexceed 200-400,All tinkers have a Life Quest: to attain perfect understandingof a single device. Few ever actually attain this goal, but theirindividual Life Quests do keep the ever hopeful tinkers busy.Males and females are equal in tinker society and each pursueLife Quests with similar devotion. Each tinker gnome belongs toa guild. The guild occupies the same place in a tinker s life thatthe clan occupies for other gnomes. Together the guildmastersmake up a grand council that governs the community.Though most tinker gnomes are content to stay home and tin¬ker with their projects, some have Life Quests which requirethem to venture out into the world. Adventuring gnomes aregenerally unable to learn from past experience and repeat thesame mistakes, yet they are often successful with quirky solu¬tions to save the day tor their companions.Ecology: Despite their great friendliness, tinker gnomes are notwell-liked by other races; their technological bent makes themquite alien to those accustomed to magic, and their poor under¬standing ot social relations puts off many potential friends. Sagesgenerally agree that the tinkers' indiscriminate trumpeting oftechnology has discouraged its development by other races whohave encountered tinker gnomes.Shy and elusive, the forest gnomes live deep in forests and shuncontact with other races except in times of dire emergenciesthreatening their beloved woods. The smallest of all the gnomes,they average 2 to 2ri 2 feet in height, with bark-colored, gray-green skin dark hair, and blue, brown, or green eyes. A verylong-lived people, they have an average life expectancy of 500years.In addition to their own gnomish dialect, most forest gnomescan speak gnome common frock gnome}, Elf, Treant, and a sim¬ple language that enables them to communicate on a very basiclevel with forest animals. All forest gnomes have the innate abili¬ty to pass without trace. hide in woodlands {90% chance of suc¬cess), and the same saving throw bonus as their rock gnomecousins.Combat: Forest gnomes prefer boobie traps and missile weaponsto melee weapons when dealing with enemies. Due to size andquickness they receive a -4 bonus to Armor Class wheneverthey are fighting M- or L-sized opponents. Forest gnomes receivea +1 bonus to all attack and damage rolls when fighting ores,lizardmen, troglodytes, or any creature which they have seendamage their forest.HabitabSoctety; Forest gnomes live in small villages of less than100 gnomes, each family occupying a large, hollowed-out tree.Most of these villages are disguised so well that even an elf or aranger could walk through one without realizing it.Ecology: Forest gnomes are guardians of the woods and friendsto the animals that live there. They will often help lost travellersbut will strive to remain unseen while doing so.
2-8/2-8 (weapon) + 7 (Strength bonus)Spells, thief abilitiesSee belowNilThese ugly, dour cousins of gnomes are able to become giant¬sized at will.In either size, spriggans look basically the same. They are ugly,thick-bodied humanoids, with pale or dull yellow skin, brown orblack hair and red eyes. On rare occasions a spriggan may havered hair, which they believe is a symbol of good luck. Their nosesare large and bulbous, but not beyond the human norm. Theyare very fond of mustaches and bushy sideburns, but they neverclean or comb them. This same policy of uncleanliness extends totheir bodies and any other possessions. Spriggans smell of dankearth, stale sweat, and grime.Outside of their lair they always wear armor and carry weap¬ons, usually polearms, although they have been known to carryswords or maces. Spriggans never use shields. They like to carryseveral nasty little daggers concealed in various places in theirarmor. Spriggans never wear jewelry or other ornaments. Theyprefer to keep these things with their hoard, where they broodover them at odd moments.Combat; Spriggans are tricky and tough in battle. They have awide variety of options for combat. Their major ability is tochange from small to giant size at will. Weapons, armor and oth¬er inanimate objects cm their person shrink and grow with them.This action takes the whole round, during which they can moveup to 30 feet but not tight. When small, spriggans can use thefollowing spell-like effects; affect normal fires, shatter, and scare(with a *~2 penalty to the saving throw, due to their ugliness).They can perform any one of these instead of fighting, once inany round, as often as they want. When giant-sized, sprigganscannot perform magic, other than to shrink again. In this formthey are as strong as hill giants (19).In either size, they have Sth-level thief abilities like those of agnome w f ith an 18 Dexterity. This high Dexterity enables them touse a weapon twice each round* They can pick pockets (75%),open locks (78%), find or remove traps (70%), move silently(77%), hide in shadows (64%), hear noise (35%), climb walls(81 %), and read languages (40%). Keep in mind that their sizemay affect these chances indirectly. For example* it is difficult fora 12-foot-tall giant to hide in a 6-foot-tall shadow. They canbackstab only while in small form, and they inflict triple damageif Successful.Spriggans can never quite get organized as groups. In fact.they are sometimes encountered with part of the group giant-sized and part of them gnome-sized* On an individual level theyare very clever and use their abilities to the fullest to accomplishtheir goals. These goats are usually to cause great havoc andmayhem amongst other races. They seem to take great pleasurein destroying property and hurting innocent creatures.Hahitat/Society; Spriggans usually travel in packs* all of themmale. The females keep to dismal burrows or secret dens inforgotten ruins* rarely venturing out farther than necessary togather food. A female has the same combat abilities as a maleexcept that they have only 7 + 4 Hi! Dice in giant form. The fe¬males mate with males from packs that wander nearby. The chil¬dren are cast out upon reaching maturity, the males to join upwith packs and the females to find a place to lair. Spriggan infantmortality is high, with the males 130%) surviving more oftenthan the females (60%).Spriggans hate gnomes more than any living creatures, butthey truly love none but those of their own ilk. Perhaps it is thesimilarity of the true gnomes to their race that drives their ha¬tred. They like to terrorize, rob, and otherwise work vile deeds.They do not hesitate to attack or steal from traveling groups orsmall settlements in their area. All of their possessions, includingtheir armor and weapons, are stolen from their victims. Theygreatly fear large groups of organized humans and demihumans,and they avoid such parties.Ecology; The roving packs of males tend to be meat eaters, pre¬ferring to hunt or steal their food. As such they must keep mov¬ing and establish wide areas of control. The females tend to ealfruits and grains that can be easily gathered near their dens. Theyeat meat only when offered by a male as part of the mating ritual.Spriggans are too mean and nasty to have any natural preda¬tors. although gnomes attack them on sight unless faced withoverwhelming odds. It usually takes a well-armed party to rootout a band of spriggans*
These small, evil humanoids would be merely pests, if not fortheir great numbers.Goblins have flat faces, broad noses, pointed ears, widemouths and small, sharp tangs. Their foreheads slope back, andtheir eyes are usually dull and glazed. They always walk upright,but their arms hang down almost to their knees. Their skin colorsrange From yellow through any shade of orange to a deep red.Usually a single tribe has members all of about the same colorskin. Their eyes vary from bright red to a gleaming lemon yel¬low. They wear clothing of dark leather, tending toward dullsoiled-looking colors.Goblin speech is harsh, and pitched higher than that of hu¬mans, in addition to their own language, some goblins can speakin the kobold, ore, and hobgoblin tongues.Combat: Goblins hate bright sunlight, and fight with a -1 ontheir attack rolls when in it. This unusual sensitivity to light,however, serves the goblins well underground, giving them infra¬vision out to 60 feet. They can use any sort of weapon, preferringthose that take little training, like spears and maces. They areknown to carry short swords as a second weapon, They are usu¬ally armored in leather, although the leaders may have chain oreven plate mail.Goblin strategies and tactics are simple and crude. They arecowardly and will usually avoid a face-to-face fight. More oftenthan not, they will attempt to arrange an ambush of their foes.Habitat/Society: Humans would consider the caves and under¬ground dwellings of goblins to be dank and dismal. Those fewtribes that live above ground are found in ruins, and are onlyactive at night or on very dark, cloudy days. They use no form ofsanitation, and their lairs have a foul stench. Goblins seem to besomewhat resistant to the diseases that breed in such filth.They live a communal life, sharing large common areas foreating and sleeping. Only leaders have separate living spaces. Ailtheir possessions are carried with them. Property of the tribe iskept with the chief and sub-chiefs. Most of their goods are stolen,although they do manufacture their own garments and leathergoods. The concept of privacy is largely foreign to goblins.A typical goblin tribe has 40-400 (4dl0 x 10) adult male war¬riors. For every 40 goblins there will be a leader and his 4 assist¬ants, each having 1 Hit Die (7 hit points). For every 200 goblinsthere will be a sub-chief and 2-8 (2d4) bodyguards, each of whichhas 1 + 1 Hit Dice (8 hit points), is Armor Class 5. and armedwith a battle axe, The tribe has a single goblin chief and 2-8 (2d4)bodyguards each of 2 Hit Dice, Armor Class 4, and armed withtwo weapons.There is a 25% chance that 10% of their force will be mountedupon huge worgs, and have another 10-40 Ud4xl0) unmountedworgs with them. There is a 60% chance that the lair is guardedby 5-30 (5d6) such wolves, and a 20% chance of 2-12 (2d6) bug¬bears. Goblin shamans are rare, but have been known to reach7th level, Their spheres include: Divination, Healing (reversed),Protection, and Sun (reversed).In addition to the males, there will be adult females equal to60% of their number and children equal to the total number ofadults in the lair. Neither will fight in battles.A goblin tribe has an exact pecking order: each member knowswho is above him and who is below him. They fight amongstthemselves constantly to move up this social ladder.They often take slaves for both food and labor. The tribe willhave slaves of several races numbering 10-40% of the size of thetribe. Slaves are always kept shackled, and are staked to a com¬mon chain when sleeping.Goblins hale most other humanoids, gnomes and dwarves inparticular, and work to exterminate them whenever possible.Ecology: Goblins Jive only 50 years or so. They do not need toeat much, but will kill just for the pleasure of it. They eat anycreature from rats and snakes to humans. In lean times they willeat carrion. Goblins usually spoil their habitat* driving gamefrom it and depleting the area of all resources. They are decentminers, able to note new or unusual construction in an under¬ground area 25% of the time, and any habitat will soon be ex¬panded by a maze-like network of tunnels.Golems are magically created automatons of great power. The construc¬tion ol one involves mighty magic and elemental forces.Background: Golems predate any known literature about their creation.The wizard who discovered the process, if indeed there was only one, isunknown. Some of the rediscoverers have written their secrets in variousarcane manuals, enchanted to aid the reader in construction. It is thoughtthat the first golem created was a flesh golem, possibly an accident olsome great wizard experimenting with reanimating human bodies. Fleshgolems are easier to make than any other sort because they are made oforganic material that once lived. Later the process was generalized to suitcertain earthen materials, which produce much stronger golems.Theory: Golems are all made from elemental material. So far, the greatwizards have only discovered how to use various earthen materials, suchas clay, stone, iron, and even glass, lo make golems. The exceptions, suchas the flesh golem, use organic materials as components. The animatingforce of the golem is an elemental spirit from the elemental plane of Earth.Since the spirit is not a natural part of the body, it is not affected by mostspells or even by most weapons (see individual descriptions). The processof creating the golem binds the unwilling spirit to the artificial body andenslaves it to the will of the golem's creator The nature of this spirit isunknown, and has so far eluded the grasp of all researchers. What isknown is that it is hostile to all Prime Material plane life forms, especiallytoward the spell caster that bound il to the golem.Carving or assembling the golems physical body is an exacting task. Mostspell casters end up hiring skilled labor to do it for them, such as a stonemason or dwarf tor stone golems, etc. If the maker has no experience workingin that material, the construction time ts doubled. The standard spells forcreating golems specify the size ol the creature. Anything bigger or smallerwill not work, although some have investigated spells tor other sizes of go¬lems. with limited successThe costs listed include the base physical body and the unusual materi¬als and spell components that are consumed or become a permanent partof the golem. The rituals used to animate the golem require as much as afull uninterrupted month to complete fincluded in the time below),though some variants such as the necrophidius and scarecrow reduce thattime by employing shortcuts. In all cases the spells used can come fromdevices, such as wands or scrolls. If a magical tome is used to make thegolem, no spells are needed, and the level of the spell caster can be signifi¬cantly lower.{Note: Wl S — 15th-level wizard, P17 — 17th level priest, etc.)Combat; All golems share several: traits in common. They are all immuneto all forms of poison and cannoi be affected by hold, charm fear, orother mindbased spells, as they have no minds of their own. Certainspells can harm golems- these are mentioned belowMost golems are tearless and need never check morale.The pieces of the golem must be sewn together from the dead bodies ofnormal humans that have not decayed significantly. A minimum of 6 dif¬ferent bodies must be used, one for each limb, one for the torso (withhead), and a different one for the brain. In some cases, more bodies maybe necessary to form a complete golem. The spells needed are wish, poly*morph any object r geas. protection from normal missiles, and strength.Only a lawful good priest can create a day golem. The body is sculptedfrom a single block of clay weighing at least 1000 pounds, which takesabout a month. The vestments, which cost 30,000 gp. are the only mate^rials that are not consumed and can be reused, reducing the total costafter the first golem. The spells used are resurrection, animate objectcommune r prayer, and bless.A stone golem s body is chiseled trom a single block of hard stone, such asgranite, weighing at least 3000 pounds, which takes 2 months. The ritualsto animate require another month. The materials and spell componentsalone cost 60,000 gold pieces and the spells used are iw*sh f polymorph anyobject, geos, and slow.It takes 5000 pounds of iron,to build the body, which must be done by askilled iron smith. The spoils used in the ritual are wish, polymorph anyobject, geas and cloud kill Construction of the body requires an ornatesword which is incorporated into the monster. A magical sword can beused, in which case there is a 50% chance that it is drained of magic whenthe golem is animated. The golem can only use those abilities of thesword that are automatic. Any property that requires a command wordand any sentient ability of the sword is lost. If the sword is ever removedfrom Lhe golem, it loses all of Its magic.The first golems were, undoubtedly all traditional golems. Over theyears, however, various wizards and priests examined the techniques em¬ployed by earlier designers and modified them, As they introducedchanges, they documented the processes they used lo create lheir newconstructs. This process of study and modification is never-ending. Eventuday. the work of these mysterious scholars is being studied and revisedin magical colleges around the world.Theory- Like other golems, golem variants depend on the powerful forcesof elemental magic to animate them. They have no lives, of their own andare animated by a spirit from the elemental plane of Earth, In some casesthis spirit is tricked, lured, or forced into animating the body while inother cases it comes willingly. In the former cases, the si one constructsometimes breaks free of the influence of its creator and becomes a free-willed entity. Because of the nature of its physical shell, constructs thatbreak free often become berserk killers, destroying everything in theirpaths before being annihilated themselves.Construction: The actual construction of any golem s physical body is atiring and demanding task. Although the steps required to create a vari¬ant golem differ depending on the type, they do have some elements incommon. The most important ot these is the degree ot detail that is putinto the carving of the body. In the case of the caryatid column, for exam¬ple, the construct must be lovingly crafted with great skill. In most cases,the wizard or priest creating a caryatid column hires a professional sculp¬tor or stone mason to undertake this step of the animation process.Less sophisticated golems, like the stone guardian and the primitivescarecrow, do not require the artistic perfection of the caryatid column.However, they are often covered with delicate mystical runes or glyphsthat must be perfect if the creature is to be successfully animated.The body of a bone golem is assembled wholly from the bones of ani¬mated skeletons who have been defeated in combat. Any type of skeletalundead will do, but all must have been created and slain in the Demiplaneof Dread, Only 10% ol the bones from any given skeleton can be used, sothe final product is the compilation of bones from many creatures. Often,there will be animal, monster, and human bones in the same golem, giv-ing the creature a nightmarish appearance. The spells woven over thebody must include animate dead, symbol of fear, binding, andThe caryatid column can be created by a priest or wizard using a specialversion of the manual of golems Whenever such a tome is discovered,there is a 20% chance that It describes a caryatid column,TTiese creatures resemble a child s toy“oftcm a baby doll or stuffed ani¬mal. Doll golems can serve as either the guardians of children or as mur¬dering things too foul to contemplateThe spells needed to complete the animation are imbue with spell abili¬ty Toshas uncontrollable hideous laughter, r uniholy word „ bless andprayer The first known examples of this type of golem turned up on theDemiplane oF Dread in the land of Sanguinia.This creature is fashioned in the image of a real gargoyle and is oftenplaced a* a warden atop buildings, cathedrals, or tombs. It is most similarto the stone golem; the body must be carved from a single slab of granitei weighing 3,000 pounds) and prepared with expensive components Onlythe vestments created for the process are reusable (saving 15,000 gp onthe cost of additional gargoyle golems). The spells required to completethe process a re bless exaction. iuttlholy word, stone shape, coniine earthelemental and prayerThe glass golem is composed entirely of stained glass. Perhaps the most artis¬tic of all golems, its creation requires the following spells: gkssfeel. animateobject prismatic spray, rainbow and wish Because of the mixture of spells,this type of golem is usually built by multi* or dual-classed characters or withthe aid of a powerful assistant.The first appearance ol glass golems is not recorded with certainty. It isbelieved that they were created by a spell-caster who fancied himself anartist (hence their eerie beauty), but no one knows.Juggernauts that can alter their form require an extra step in their crea¬tion. which normally resembles the process to make a stone golem. Priorto animating a juggernaut, the wizard must use the mimic blood as a ma¬terial component in the final spells woven over the body. This additiongives this golem variant intelligence and an alignment,A necrophidius may be created in one of three ways. The first is a specialform of manual of golems that provides secrets of its construction. TheNecrophidicon, as il is called, must be burnt to ashes that provide themonsters animating force. The other two arcane and priestly processesare long and complex. A wizard must cast limited wish , ge«s. and charmperson spells, A priest require? the spells quest, neutralize poison prayersilence, and snake charm. Whichever method is used, I he monster re¬quires a complete giant snake skeleton (either poisonous or constrictor),slain within 24 hours of the enchantments commencement. Each ne¬crophidius is built for a single specific purpose (which must bo in thespellcasters mind when he creates it), such as 'Kill Ragrtar the Bold," Thenecrophidius never seeks to twist the intent of its maker, but its enchant¬ments fade when its task is done or cannot be completed; for example,when it kills Ragnar.The maker must want the necrophidius to serve its purpose. He couldnot, for example, build a death worm to "Sneak into the druid s hut andsteal his staff T if he really intended for the necrophidius to merely pro¬vide a distraction. He could not build more than one death worm andassign both to kill Ragnar, since he could not imbue the second deathworm with a task that he intended the first one to complete. For this rea¬son. necrophidii almost never work as a team.Rumors claim that there were once methods to make a necrophidiusgain J Hit Die every century it was pursuing its purpose.Scarecrows can only be created either by using a special manual or by agod answering the plea of a priest employing the following spells: uni-mafe object, prayer, command and quest. The final step of the process,casting the quest spell, is done during a new moon.Scarecrows can be constructed to kill a specific person. To do so theclothes worn by the scarecrow must come from the intended victim.Once the scarecrow is animated, the priest need only utter a singleword—"Quest". The scarecrow then moves in a direct line toward thevictim. When it reaches the victim, the scarecrow disregards all other be¬ings and concentrates its gaze and attacks entirely on the person it hasbeen created to kill. After slaying its victim, a quested scarecrows magicdissipates and it collapses into dust.A stone guardian is very' similar to a traditional stone golem, but it hassome unique abilities its ancestor does not In physical appearance, thetwo constructs are quite similar, but the stone guardian is usually deco¬rated with runes and magical glyphs.A stone guardian is created with the following spells; enchant an itemtransmute mud fn rock, magic mouth and limited wish or wish. In addi¬tion, the wizard creating the guardian may cast a detect invisible spell togive the creature that power.The initial material of the body is mud around a heart of polishedstone. As the various spells are woven into the body, a spirit from theelemental plane of Earth is forced to enter the body and animate it. Be¬cause the spirit is there against its will, there is a 20% chance that thegolem goes berserk each time it is activated,A special of protection can be created when the stone guardian isanimated; this prevents the guardian from striking at anyone wearing it.In addition, all those within TO feet of the ring wearer are also immune toattack. Rings oi this type function only against the guardian they weremade with and provide nu protection from any other golem.
A greater golem is an artificial humanoid body which has beenanimated by an elemental spirit but remains under the completecontrol of its creator.A stone golem isQ 1 ? feet tall and weighs around 2000 pounds.Its body is of roughly chiseled stone, frequently stylized to suit itscreator. For example it might be carved to to look like it is wear¬ing armor with a particular symbol on the chest plate. Sometimesdesigns are worked into the stone of its limbs. The head may bechiseled to resemble a helmet or other head piece. Regardless ofthese elements, it always has the basic humanoid parts (2 arms, 2legs, head with 2 eyes, nose, mouth etc.). It is always weaponlessand never wears clothing.Combat: Greater golems are mindless in combat, only follow-mg the simple tactics of their masters. They are completely emo¬tionless and cannot be swayed in any way from theirinstructions They will not pick up and use weapons in combat,even if ordered to, always preferring their fists. Stone golemshave a strength of 22, for purposes of breaking or throwingthings.The stone golem is immune to any weapon, except those of + 2or better enchantment. A rock to mud spell slows a golem for2-12 (2d6) rounds. Its reverse, mud to rock acts to heal the golem,restoring all lost hit points. A flesh to stone spell does not actu¬ally change the golem's structure, but does make it vulnerable toany normal attack for the following round, This does not includespells, except those that will cause direct damage. All other spellsare ignored. Once every other round, the stone golem can cast asloir spell upon any opponent with 10 feet of it.Habitat Society: Golems are automatons, artificially createdand under the direct control of their creator. They have no socie-tv and are not associated with any particular habitat. They arefrequently used to guard valuable items or places. Unlike thelesser golems, the greater golems are always under the completecontrol of their master, A greater golem can obey simple instruc¬tions involving direct actions with simple conditional phrases.Although this is better than a lesser golem is capable of follow¬ing, they still make poor servants Any given task could take sev¬eral separate commands to direct the golem to its completion.Ecology: Golems are not natural creatures, and play no part inthe ecology of the world. They neither eat nor sleep, and 'live"until they are destroyed, usually in combat. Certain spells (seeabove) can be used to heal or repair any damage done to them incombat. This is usually done by their creators to insure long andvaluable service.An iron golem is twice the height of a normal man, and weighsaround 5000 pounds. It can be fashioned in any stylized manner,just like the stone golems, although it almost always is built dis¬playing armor of some sort, its features are much smoother incontrast to the stone golem, Iron golems are sometimes foundwith a short sword (relative to their size) in one hand. On ex¬tremely rare occasions this sword will be magical.The iron golem cannot speak or make any vocal noise,nor does it have any distinguishable odor. It moves with a pon¬derously smooth gait at hall the speed of a normal man. Eachstep causes the floor to tremble, unless it is on a thick, solidfoundation*Combat: The iron golem conforms to the strategies listed forthe stone golem except as described here. It has a strength of 24for the purposes of lifting, throwing or breaking objects. Theiron golem is immune to any weapon, except those of +3 or bet¬ter enchantment. Magical electrical attacks will slow it for 3rounds, and magical fire attacks actually repair 1 hit point ofdamage for each hit die of damage it would have caused. All oth¬er spells are ignored. Iron golems are subject to the damage in¬flicted by a rust monster. Once every 7 rounds, beginning eitherthe first or second round of combat, the iron golem breathes outa doud of poisonous gas. Jt does this automatically, with no re¬gard to the effects it might have. The gas cloud fills a 10 foot cubedirectly in front of it, which dissipates by the following round,assuming there is somewhere for the gas to go.A golem is an artificial humanoid body which is animated by an ele¬mental spirit and under the control of its creator.The flesh golem stands a head and a half faller than most humans andweighs almost 350 pounds. It is made from a ghoulish collection ofstolen human body parts, stitched together to form a single compos-ite human body. Its skin is the sickly green or yellow of partially de¬cayed flesh. A flesh golem smells faintly of freshly dug earth anddead flesh. No natural animal, such as a dog. will willingly track aflesh golem. It wears whatever clothing its creator desires, usuallyjust a ragged pair of trousers, ft has no possessions, and no weapons.The golem can not speak, although it can emit a hoarse roar of sorts.It walks and moves with a stiff jointed gait, as if it is not in completecontrol over its body parts.Combat: The lesser golems are mindless in combat, They follow theorders of their master explicitly and are incapable of any strategy ortactics. They are emotionless in combat, and cannot be easily pro¬voked (unless they have broken control and gone berserk). They willnot use weapons for combat even if ordered to, always preferring tostrike with their fists. Flesh golems have a strength of 19 for purposes oflifting, throwing or breaking down doors.Flesh golems can only be struck by a magical weapon. Fire andcold based spells merely slow them for 2-12 (2d6) rounds. Any elec¬trical attack restores 1 hit point for each die of damage it would nor¬mally have done All other spells are ignored by the creature.The elemental spirit in a lesser golem is not bound strongly, result¬ing in a J % cumulative chance per round of combat, calculated inde¬pendently for each fight, that it will break free of its master. The fleshgolem s master has a 10% chance per round of regaining control. Todo this he must be within 60 feet of the flesh golem, and the creaturemust be able to see and hear its master. No special spells are requiredto regain control, its creator just has to talk to it forcefully and per¬suasively. to convince it to obey.HabitatSodety: Golems are automatons, artificially created andunder the direct control of their creator. They have no society andare not associated with any particular habitat. They are frequentlyused to guard valuable items or places. A lesser golem can obey sim¬ple instructions involving a single, direct action. They make poor ser¬vants because each detail of a task must be given as a separatecommand.Ecology; Golems are not natural creatures, and play no part in theworld’s ecology. They neither eat nor sleep, and ‘live’’ until theirbodies are destroyed, usually in combat.The clay golem is a humanoid body made from day. and stnds aboutIS inches taller than a normal man. It weighs around 600 pounds. Thefeatures are grossly distorted from the human norm. The chest is over¬ly large, with arms attached by thick knots of muscle at the shoulderIts arms hang down to its knees, and end in short stubby fingers. It hasno neck, and a large head with broad flat features. Its legs are short andbowed, with wide flat feet, A day golem wears no clothing except for ametal or stiff leather garment around Its hips. It smells faintly of day.The golem can not speak, or make any noise. It walks and moves witha slow and clumsy gait, almost as if it were not in control over itsactions.Combat: Clay golems conform to the strategies listed above for theflesh golem except as noted here. A day golem has a strength of 20for the purposes of iifLing, throwing or smashing objects. They canonly be struck by magical blunt weapons such as hammers or maces.A move earth spdl will drive the golem back 120 feet and inflict 3-36Gdl2) points of damage upon it. A disintegrate spell merely slowsthe golem for 1-6 rounds and causes 1-12 points of damage. An earth¬quake spell cast directly at a clay golem will stop it from moving thatturn and inflict 5-50 (5dIQ) points of damage. After it has engaged inat least one round of combat, the day golem can haste itself for 3rounds. It can only do this once per day. Damage done by the golemcan only be cured by a heal spell from a priest of 17th level or greater,The elemental spirit in a lesser golem is not bound strongly, result¬ing in a 1% cumulative chance per round of combat, calculated inde¬pendently for each fight, that it will break free of its master. If a daygolem does manage to break control, it becomes a berserker, attack¬ing everything in sight until it is destroyed. Its first action is to hasteitself, if it can, Unlike the flesh golem, there is no chance to regaincontrol of a rampaging day golem.
The bone golem is built from the previously animated bones ofskeletal undead. These horrors stand roughly 6 feet tall andweight between 50 and 60 pounds. They are seldom armored andcan easily be mistaken for undead, much to the dismay of thosewho make this error.Combat: Bone golems are no more intelligent than other forms ofgolem, so they will not employ dever tactics or strategies in com¬bat, Their great power, however, makes them far deadlier thanthey initially appear to be There is a 95% chance that those notfamiliar with the true nature of their opponent will mistake themfor simple undead.Bone golems attack with their surprisingly strong blows andsharp, daw-like fingers. Each successful hit inflicts 3-24 <3dS)points of damage. They can never be made to use weapons of anysort in melee.In addition to the common characteristics of ail Ravenloft go¬lems (described previously), bone golems take only half damagefrom those edged or piercing weapons that can harm them.Bone golems are immune to almost all spells, but can be laidlow with the aid of a shatter spell that is focused on them and hasthe capacity to affect objects of their weight. If such a spell is castat a bone golem, the golem is entitled to a saving throw vs. spellsto negate it. Failure indicates that weapons able to harm the go¬lem will now inflict twice the damage they normally would.Thus, edged weapons would do full damage while blunt oneswould inflict double damage.Once every three rounds, the bone golem may throw back itshead and issue a hideous laugh that causes all those who hear it tomake fear and horror checks. Those who fail either check areparalyzed and cannot move for 2-12 rounds. Those who fail frofJichecks are instantly stricken dead with fear.The doll golem is an animated version of a child's toy that canbe pul to either good uses I defending the young) or evil uses (at¬tacking them). It is often crafted so as to make it appear brightand cheerful when at rest. Upon activation, however, its featuresbecome twisted and horrific.Combat: The doll golem is, like all similar creatures, immune toalmost all magical attacks. It can be harmed by fire-based spells,although these do only half damage, while a warp wood spellwill affect the creature as if it were a stem? spell. A mending spellrestores the creature to full hit points at once.Each round, the doll golem leaps onto a victim and attempts tobite it, Success inflicts 3d6 points of damage and forces the victimto save versus spells. Failure to save causes the victim to begin tolaugh uncontrollably (as if under the influence of a Tosha's un¬controllable hideous laughter spell) and become unable to per¬form any other action. The effects of the creature's bite are farworse, however. The victim begins to laugh on the round afterthe failed save. At this time, they take ld4 points of damage fromthe muscle spasms imposed by the laughter. On followingrounds, this increases to 2d4, then 3d4, and so on. The laughterstops when the character dies or receives a dispel magic , Follow*ing recovery, the victim suffers a penalty on all attack and savingthrows of -1 per round that they were overcome with laughter(e,g,, four rounds of uncontrolled laughter would equal a -4 pen¬alty on attack/saving throws). This represents the weaknesscaused by the character’s inability to breathe and is reduced by 1point per subsequent turn until the character is fully recovered.
The gargoyle golem is a stone construct designed to guard a givenstructure* It is roughly the same size and weight as a real gargoyle(6' tail and 550 pounds). Although they have wings, they cannotfly* However, a gargoyle golem can leap great distances (up to100 feet) and will often use this ability to drop down on enemiesnearing any building the golem is protecting.Gargoyle golems cannot speak or communicate in any way.When they move, the sound of grinding rock can be heard byanyone near them. In fact, it is often this noise that serves as aparty's first warning that something is amiss in an area.Combat: When a gargoyle golem attacks in melee combat, it doesso with its two clawed fists* Each fist must attack the same targetand will inflict 3d6 points of damage. Anyone hit by both attacksmust save versus petrification or be turned to stone. On theround after a gargoyle golem has petrified a victim, it will attackthat same target again Any hit scored by the golem against sucha foe indicates that the stone body has shattered and cannot beresurrected , Remcamotion, on the other hand, is still a viableoption.Gargoyle golems are, like most golems, immune to almost eve¬ry form of magical attack directed at them. They are, however,vulnerable to the effects of an earthquake spell. If such a spell istargeted directly at a gargoyle golem, it instantly shatters thecreature without affecting the surrounding area. The lesser trans¬mute rock to mud spell will inflict 2dl0 points of damage to thecreature while the reverse (transmute mud to rock) will heal alike amount of damage*On the first round of any combat in which the gargoyle golemhas not been identified for what it is, it has a good chance of gain¬ing surprise (-2 on opponent surprise checks). Whenever a gar¬goyle golem attacks a character taken by surprise, it will leaponto that individual* The crushing weight of the creature delivers4dI0 points of damage and requires every object carried by thatcharacter in a vulnerable position (DM s decision) to save vs.crushing blows or be destroyed. In the round that a gargoyle go¬lem pounces on a character, it cannot attack with its fists.The glass golem is very nearly a work of art. Built in the formof a stained glass knight, the creature is often built into a windowfashioned from such glass* Thus, It usually acts as the guardianof a given location—often a church or shrine.Glass golems, like most others, never speak or communicate inany way. When they move, however, they are said to produce atinkling sound like that made by delicate crystal wind chimes. Ifmoving through a lighted area, they strobe and flicker as the lightstriking them is broken into its component hues.Combat: When the stained glass golem attacks, it often has theadvantage of surprise. If its victims have no reason to suspectthat it lurks in a given window, they suffer a -3 on their surpriseroll when the creature makes its presence known.Once combat is joined, the stained glass figure (which alwayshas the shape of a knight) strikes with is sword. Each blow thatlands delivers 2dl2 points of damage*Once every three rounds, the golem can unleash a prismaticspray spell from its body that fans out in all directions* Any ob¬ject or being (friend or foe) within 25 feet of the golem must rollas if they had been struck by a wizard s prismatic spray spell (seethe AD&D* Players Handbook ),Glass golems are the most fragile of any type of Raverdoft go¬lem, Any blunl weapon capable of striking them (that h. a magi¬cal weapon of +2 or better) inflicts double damage. Further, ashatter spell directed at them weakens them so that all subse-quent melee attacks have a percentage chance equal to twice thenumber of points of damage inflicted of instantly slaying thecreature.Anyone casting a mending spell on one of these creatures in¬stantly restores it to full hit points. In addition., they regenerate 1hit point per round when in an area of direct sunlight (or itsequivalent),
The necrophidius and scarecrow are constructs like all other go¬lems, but they are less powerful because of the magical shortcutsemployed in their construction.The necrophidius, or ‘death worm," is built and animated for asingle task, such as protection or assassination. It has thebleached-white skeleton of' a giant snake, a famged human skull,and constantly whirling, milk-white eyes. Its bones are warm tothe touch. The necrophidius is odorless and absolutely silent; theskeleton makes no noise, even when slithering across a floorstrewn with leaves. A necrophidius is constantly moving with amacabre grace.Combat: The necrophidius prefers to surprise opponents, and itssilence imposes a -* 2 penalty to their surprise rolls. It" the ne¬crophidius is not surprised, it performs a macabre maneuvercalled the Dance of Death, a hypnotic swaying backed by minormagic. The Dance rivets the attention of anyone who observes it,unless a successful saving throw vs, spell is rolled. Intelligent vic¬tims are immobilized, as per the hypnotism spell. This allows thenecrophidius to attack without opposition.Besides taking damage as indicated, a bitten victim must makea saving throw vs. spell or be paralyzed and unconscious for ld4turns. This effect can be cancelled only by dispel magic; neutral¬ize poison is useless.This creature acts and reacts as if it had Intelligence 10 How^ever, its mind is artificial, so mind influencing spelb have no ef¬fect. The creature is immune to poison and requires no sleep orsustenance. It is not undead and cannot be turned.Statistics in italics above refer to conscious scarecrows.Scarecrows are enchanted creatures made from the same mate¬rials as normal scarecrows. Though non-intelligent, they tan fol¬low simple, one- or two-phrase orders from the priest whocreated them. They do so to the best of their ability, without re¬gard to their own safety.Each scarecrow is unique, but all share several characteristics.Their bodies, arms, and legs are always made of cut wood boundwith rope. Tattered rags cover the frame, and are sometimesstuffed with grass or straw. A hollow gourd with a carved faceserves as head. Once animated, a fiery light burns m the scare¬crow s eye sockets. Scarecrows are light but slow. Their kg andelbow joints bend both ways, so they move with an uneven, jer¬ky gait, and the head spins freely.Scarecrows do not speak, but cackle madly when attacking.Combat: Once per round, a scarecrow can gaze at one creaturewithin 40 feet. Any intelligent person meeting this gaze mustmake a successful saving throw vs, spells or be fascinated, stand¬ing transfixed, arms hanging limply, allowing the scarecrow tostrike again and again (automatic hit each round). The charmlasts until the scarecrow either dies or leaves the area tor a fullturn. The scarecrow's touch causes Idb damage and has an effectidentical to the gaze (saving throws apply), A scarecrow attacksone victim at a time, striking the first person charmed until dead.While slaying its victim, the scarecrow uses its gaze attack tocharm other opponents as possible. Scarecrows attack until de¬stroyed or ordered to stop.Scarecrows are vulnerable to fire. Fire-based attacks gain a + 1bonus to the attack roll and a +1 damage bonus per die.The magic that created them keeps their tattered parts fromdecomposing and shields them from the effects of cold.Most scarecrows disintegrate when their creators die, but a few(10%) become conscious, gaining an evil alignment, average In¬telligence (8-10), and great cunning. They gain a desire for self-preservation, so their morale drops to elite (13-14). They hide byday and stalk the night committing acts of evil. Because scare¬crows hate fire and are immune to cold, conscious scarecrows tryto reach colder climes. During the trek they kill everything theyencounter, including those who pose no threat. Conscious scare¬crows hate all life and kill humans and demihumans wheneverpossible.
These variant golems are close relatives of the dreadful stone go¬lems. They are generally created by powerful wizards and em¬ployed as guards or servants in a wide variety of settings.The caryatid column is a beautiful and wondrous construct, Be¬fore activation, it looks like the classical architectural work it isnamed For, standing about 7 feet tall, and resembling a finelycarved pillar in the shape of a beautiful young girl- Close exami¬nation reveals that the maiden has a slender sword in her lefthand, but there is no indication that the column is anything otherthan what it appears to be. Once constructed and animated, it isusually assigned to keep watch over a valuable object or specialplaces. It does so, remaining motionless, until its preset activa¬tion conditions are triggered (these depend on the creator's in¬structions). As soon as this happens, the column moves to takeaction against those who have triggered it.When activated, the caryatid column undergoes a stunningand swift transformation. The smooth, grey stone that was onceits skin changes hue to become light or dark flesh tones (depend¬ing on the nature of the carving), the eyes come alive with agleaming white light, and the thin blade transforms into a fineweapon of gleaming steel.In combat, the column lashes out with its gleaming sword,causing 2d4 points of damage with each hit. The columns magi¬cal nature gives it a +4 bonus to saving throws, and all non-magical weapons inflict only half damage. Magical weaponsinflict full damage, buL do not receive the magical bonus normal¬ly due them. For example, a long sword +2 does not gain its +2bonus, but inflicts normal long sword damage.There is a 25% chance that a weapon shatters when it success¬fully strikes a caryatid column. This chance is reduced by 5% foreach plus of the weapon. Thus, a sword +2 has only a 15%chance of breaking, A magical weapon with no attack bonus isconsidered a +1 weapon when checking for shattering,A sfom? to flesh, transmute rock to mud, or stone shape spelldestroys the column instantly if it fails its saving throw.When a caryatid column has completed its task, it returns to itswailing position and reverts to stone. If it is killed in combat, it(and its sword) reverts to stone for 2d6 rounds, at the end ofwhich time it crumbles into dust.The juggernaut generally appears as a huge, powerful stone vehi¬cle of some sort, with wheels or rollers for locomotion.A juggernaut is clumsy and slow moving, but St makes up forthese handicaps by rolling right over opponents in a deadlycrushing attack. A juggernaut has a movement rale of 3 in its firstround of animation. This increases by 3 each round to a maxi¬mum of 12, A juggernaut is slow to turn, and can change direc¬tion only 90 degrees for even,' 30 feet of movement.Anyone caught in the path of a juggernaut charge is run overby the thundering behemoth, though the juggernaut must make anormal attack roll if the victim can avoid the charge. A hit indi¬cates that the victim is crushed, suffering IGdlG points of dam¬age. In addition, every item carried by the victim must roll asaving throw vs. crushing blow to avoid destruction. A success¬ful saving throw vs. death magic entitles the victim to only halfdamage, but it does not protect his equipment.Some juggernauts are a unique crossbreed of stone golem andmimte, Once animated, these juggernauts can alter their shape asthe mimics do. They can grow up to six limbs, each designed forcurrent needs. For example, if it wishes to sound a warning, alimb may grow into a trumpet or horn, In combat, its limbs be¬come maces or hammers that inflict 2d6 points of damage each,due to its great strength. A juggernaut can rarely bring more thantwo limbs to bear on a single opponent*In combat* a guardian slams opponents with its massive arms,each of which inflicts ld8 +1 points of damage The stone guard¬ian suffers only 1 /* damage from edged weapons and Va damagefrom all cold, fire, or electrical attacks. Normal missiles cause nodamage. A stone guardian can be instantly destroyed by a stoneto flesh , transmute rock to mud, stone shape, or dig spell; it is notentitled to a saving throw.
Gorgons are tierce, bull-like beasts who make their lairs in drearycaverns or the fastness of a wilderness. They are aggressive bynature and usually attack any creature or person they encounter.Monstrous black bulls, gorgons have hides of thick metalscales. Their breath is a noxious vapor that billows forth in greatpuffs from their wide, bull nostrils. Gorgons walk on twohooves, when necessary, but usually assume a four-hoofedstance. Despite their great size r they can move through evenheavy forests with incredible speed, for they simply tramplebushes and splinter smaller trees, Gorgons speak no languagesbut let out a roar of anger whenever they encounter other beings.Combat: Four times per day gorgons can make a breath weap¬on attack ftheir preferred means of attack). Their breath shootsforth in a truncated cone, five feet wide at the base and 20 feetwide at its end, with a maximum range of 60 feel. Any creaturecaught in this cone must roll a saving throw vs. petrification.Those who fail are turned to stone immediately! The awarenessof gorgons extends into the Astral and Ethereal planes, as do theeffects of their breath weapon.If necessary (he., their breath weapon fails) gorgons will en¬gage in melee, charging forward to deliver a vicious head butt orhorn gore. Gorgons fight with unrestricted ferocity, slashing andtrampling all who challenge them until they themselves are slain.Ha bi tat.'Society: It is believed that gorgons can actually de¬vour the living statues they create with their breath weapon.Whether their flat iron teeth break up and pulverize the stone orlheir saliva returns the victim to flesh while they eat is a matterfor conjecture,Their primary prey are deer and elk, but gorgons won't hesi¬tate to add other meats to their diet when hungry. Their sense ofsmell is acute and once they get on the trail gorgons are 75%likely to track their victim successfully. Once their victim is insight, gorgons let out a scream of rage and then charge. Unlesssomehow evaded, a gorgon will pursue tirelessly, for days if nec¬essary, until the prey either drops from exhaustion or is caught inthe gorgon's deadly breath,Gorgons have no use for treasure, hence gold and gems areoften left petrified on the statue of the being that once wore them.Occasionally a gorgon in his haste will devour something of val¬ue: the items will later be left in the gorgon s droppings, some¬where near the entrance to its lair,Gorgons are usually encountered in groups of three or four—one male bull with two or three females. Gorgon calves are raisedby the females to the age of two, then the young bulls are turnedout to make their own way. Females remain with the dominantbull.About 25% of the time only a single gorgon is encountered.Lone gorgons are always rogue males in search of females.The forest around a gorgon lair is usually a crisscrossing net¬work of trails and paths they've made. Occasionally there areclearings where the grasses were trampled down in a battle andperhaps the shattered remains of a statue can be found.Ecology: Gorgons have no natural enemies other than them¬selves, Bull gorgons are often called upon to defend their posi¬tions against rogue gorgons. These battles are no! usually fatal,but even a gorgon can be felled by a well-aimed horn gore. Theonly other creature known to hunt these fierce predators is man.Gorgon blood, properly prepared, can seal an area againstethereal or astral intrusion; their powdered scales are an ingredi¬ent in the ink used to create a protection from petrification scroll.In addition, the hide of a gorgon can be fashioned, with con¬siderable work and some magical enhancement, into a Fine set ofscale mail. This armor will provide the wearer with a +2 bonusto all saving throws vs. petrification or flesh-to-stone spells.
The grell is a fearsome carnivore that looks like a giant brain witha vicious beak and 10 dangling tentacles, each 6 feet long. Somegrell are rogues, while others live in family units. The "civilized”grell is a hive or colony creature, much like an ant or a bee. butfar more intelligent, arrogant and dangerous.Grell have a weird language composed of bird-like squawksand chirps, combined with tentacular motion and a limited telep¬athy with other grell. Other creatures cannot learn the grell lan¬guage, and they would not deign to learn the language of "lesserbeings" (a synonym for "food" in their language).Combat: The grell's most common strategy is to use its naturallevitation ability to hide in the upper reaches of large chambers,it can then drop silently on a victim, who suffers a “3 penalty tosurprise rolls when attacked in this way.A worker grell attacks with all 10 tentacles; each one that hitsgrips the opponent (the grip can be broken with a successful bendbars lift gates roll). For each hit. the victim must roll a savingthrow vs. paralysis, with a +4 bonus, or be paralyzed for 5d4rounds. With two tentacles gripping the prey the grell can lift itup toward the ceiling and devour the prey when desired, A grellautomatically hits paralyzed prey each round.Soldier grell often use weapons, including the tip-spear and thelightning lance* The tip-spear is an edged metal head which fitson the tip of a tentacle and is held there by suction; the weaponcauses ld6 damage if used to slash, 2d6 if used to impale. Victimshit by a tip-spear must make a saving throw vs. paralysis, as if hitby a tentacle. The lightning lance delivers 3d6 points of electricaldamage to those hit with it, though a successful saving throw vs.spells halves the damage A lightning lance starts with 36charges: it can use one per round.Any hit against a tentacle (AC 4) renders it unusable, but sub¬tracts no hit points from the grell s total. Grell regenerate lost ordamaged tentacles in 1-2 days, and are immune to electrical at¬tacks.Grell use strategy and tactics in their battles, and can attackmore than one opponent each round. They are intelligent enoughto allocate their tentacle attacks in an advantageous way. Theyuse their beaks only against paralyzed prey.Habitat/Sodety Grell have a distinct hierarchy. Each hive is ledby a patriarch, who gives orders to the philosophers, who directthe soldiers and workers in their every day tasks. A hive occupiesan underground complex, or travels by ship.Supposedly, all grell answer to a mysterious Imperator, a grellof great power who can unite all the grell for a common cause; toconquer a realm, a territory, or even a world.A grell mates but once in its 30-40 year life span. The femalelater lays a dutch of 2d4 eggs. Young are bom active and self-sufficient, but with only 1 Hit Die. They gain 1 Hit Die every twomonths until they reach adulthood.Ecology: Arrogant and vicious, grell hunt their territories to ex¬haustion, then move on to more fertile places.A grell’s paralytic poison cannot be extracted from the crea¬tures body, but parts of the monster s body can be used for spellsor items relating to levitation or electricity.So Idler/Worker; These are the common grell that form the bulkof a hive or a raiding party Occasionally a grell will become sep-arated bom its fellows; these become rogues. Rogues carry noweapons, collect no treasure, and avoid sunlight.Philosopher: These grell serve as intermediaries between patri¬archs and workers /soldiers. Some lead lesser grell in combat,and there is one philosopher for every 10 lesser grell encountered.Some philosophers (20%) wear powerful rings of protection, giv¬ing them AC 0, About 10% of philosophers can cast spells as2nd level wizards.Patriarch: Each hive has a patriarch, a huge, sedentary mass offlesh that directs the lesser grell. If the patriarch is taken to a ship,it can dig its many tentacles into the ship and animate it, evenmake it fly to other worlds.Often mistaken for imps, gremlins are small, winged goblinoids.There are many varieties of gremlins, and most are chaotic andmischievous. Their skin color ranges from brown to black togray, frequently in a mottled blend, Their ears are very large andpointed, giving them a 65% chance to hear noise* A pair of bat¬like wings enables them to fly or glide. Gremlins never wearclothing or ornamentation.Combat: Gremlins are worthless in reaJ combat; at every oppor¬tunity they flee rather than fight face-to-face* What gremlins liketo do best is cause trouble. The angrier their victims are, the hap¬pier the gremlins. Their favorite tactic is to set up a trap to humil¬iate opponents and maybe even cause them to damage a valuedpossession or hurt a loved one. If the opponent gets hurt as well,that's just fine. For example, the gremlin may set a trip wireacross a doorway that pulls down a fragile vase onto the victim shead. A building infested by a gremlin pack can be reduced toshambles in a single night.In melee, gremlins have only their weak bite for attacks (ld4points of damage). They can fly quite well (MG S), but they usu¬ally stay close to the ground or well over their opponents' heads,where they are difficult to reach. They can be hit only by magicalweapons, and are 25% resistant to magic. Despite these defenses,they are cowards and fight only if cornered.Habitat Society; Gremlins are magical creatures that originatedin an unknown plane of existence. They are highly susceptible tomutation and can interbreed with any goblinoid species. This hasresulted in several different gremlin races, each with slightly dif¬ferent abilities and natures.Gremlins travel in small packs, and they have a highly orga¬nized social order. Each gremlin knows who is above him in so¬cial rank, and who is below. As a rule, this is ordered by hitpoints, but an aggressive gremlin with lower hit points may beabove larger gremlins in the social standing. Males and femalesare indistinguishable to all but other gremlins, Both sexes partici¬pate equally in all things, Offspring are left to fend for them¬selves from birth, which they are fully capable of doing. Within amonth, the gremlin is a fully matured adult. Fortunately, they donot mate often.These obnoxious creatures usually look for a building or estateto infest. Although they flee individual combat, they will notleave the building or grounds they infest until it is no longer fun(when everything is broken and the inhabitants have fled), or un¬til their lives are in danger. Since the gremlins take great pains tonot be seen, except as fleeting shadows, the inhabitants are fre¬quently convinced that the place is haunted.Ecology: Gremlins are not a natural part of the ecology* Theirimmunity to normal weapons protects them from normal preda¬tors. Unmolested* they live for centuries.These friendly gremlins are quite harmless, They tend to beplump, w'hiny, and lazy, but otherwise look like small, slate col¬ored gremlins* Occasionally, they become tolerable companions,if they take a liking to someone and are well fed and entertained.Even in this case* they never assist in combat and may in facthinder it by giving away the location of hiding characters ormaking other such blunders.These nasty little stone-gray creatures live in areas of dung, carri¬on, or offal. Because of their small size and coloration, they aredetected only on a 1 in 8 chance (1 in 6 for elves). They attackanything that disturbs them. Galltrit attempt to gain surprise andbite (with a +3 bonus to the attack roll if they have surprise)somewhere unobtrusive. An anesthetic in their saliva preventstheir victims from Feeling the bite, rather like a vampire bat.Once locked on, galltrits suck 1 hit point of blood per roundfor a full turn, if undisturbed. If challenged in any way, thegalltrits flee* This loss of blood reduces the victim's Constitutionby 1 point for every 4 hit points of blood lost. If the victim loses 3or more points of Constitution, usually due to multiple galltrits,he faints from the sudden blood loss, It takes two full turns toawaken and two weeks to regain the lost Constitution points.Mites are tiny* mischievous, wingless gremlins that waylaydungeon adventurers for fun and profit. Mites have hairless,warty skin varying in color from light gray to bright violet. Theirheads are triangular* with bat-like ears and a long, hooked nose.Male mites sport a bone ridge down the center of their skulls andshort goatee beards. Many wear filthy rags stolen from previousvictims. Their voices are high-pitched and twittery, conveyingonly the simplest ideas to each other; nongremlin races cannotmake sense of their language.Mites try to catch lone travelers and stragglers using pit traps(ld6 points of damage to the victim), nets (successful savingthrow vs. paralysis or the victim is caught), and trip wires (suc¬cessful Dexterity check or the victim falls prone). Mites swarmover prone or netted victims, and pummel them with weightedclubs (2% cumulative chance, per dub, of stunning the victim,but only if the victim is in armor worse than splint mail). Themites bind their unconscious victims head and foot, and dragthem into their lair. Once inside the lair, the victims are teasedand chattered at for one to four days until the mites get bored.The mites then stun their victim again, steal all their possessionsand deposit them at a random place—often one that causes thevictims great discomfort or embarrassment.Mite lairs consist of dozens of interconnecting corridors builtabove and below main dungeon corridors. Numerous entrancesconnect the mite tunnels to the dungeon, but all are hidden bycarefully placed stones (check for secret doors to find a mite tun¬nel entrance). Mite corridors are tiny by human and detnl-humanstandards; man-sized and larger creatures suffer a -4 attack rollpenalty and a +4 Armor Class penalty when fighting in a mitetunnel.Mites are small and quick* They scurry to and fro throughtheir tunnels, stopping briefly to spy on the main tunnel, alwayschattering and twittering to themselves*Deep inside the mite tunnel system is a single, large chamberwith a Jow-cdling. The mite king lives here. Sitting on his tinythrone, dressed in baggy clothes stolen from previous victims.The mite king is a fierce (by mite standards) warrior with 1 + iHit Dice, His bite causes ld4 points of damage. Also in the cham¬ber are 4db mite females and 4d6 mite children. The women have1-2 Hit Dice and bite for 1-2 points of damage* The children arenon-combatants.The chamber itself is filthy and strewn with captured weapons,armor, and dothes. Coins and such are carelessly thrown about,but mites love bright, shiny gems. These are kept by the king,who is allowed to play with them anytime he wants. Mites aremischievous and curious. They pore for hours over every littlestolen item, poking and prodding, bending and tasting, until ei¬ther they grow bored, or, more likely, the item breaks. They de¬light in wearing dothes several dozen sizes too large. Mites arefond of bones, and they sometimes drag the skulls of great mon¬sters into their lair.Mites hunt vermin and other pests, but they love to eat ironrations which they consider a delicacy. Mites are viewed as bite-sized snacks by most monsters. Evil giants sometimes featurethem as appetizers.Snyads speak no known language but seem Lo communicatewith mites successfully. These two creatures sometimes team up,with the mites distracting the victim, while the snyads dari in andgrab things.Snyads steal with great skill, surprising their targets 90% ofthe time, often snatching items directly from a person s hand (thevictim gets a successful Wisdom check to hold onto the item),then zipping back into their holes and hiding until the pursuersleave, Spotting the entrance to a snyad lair requires a successfulsearch roll; a 1 -in-3 chance for elves and a l-in-4 chance for allothers.Snyads never attack, relying on their amazingly quick reflexesto escape combat. They are not particularly strong, and any hu¬man or demi-human character with a Strength greater than 11can capture a snyad with a successful attack roll. Captured sny¬ads kick and scream, squirming and twisting to get away, butnever bite, (for fear that the captor might bite back), Because ottheir high Dexterity, snyads gain a +3 bonus to their savingthrows vs. non-area-effect spells. Snyads live in immediate fami¬lies, marrying for life.Snyads are distant relatives of mites. Their love oi treasure ottencompels them to steal from humans and demihumans. Snyadsresemble mites, but they are slightly larger (2 l h feet tall), havehill, though messy, heads of hair, and are light brown in color.
Per 10 individuals O, Q, in lairC Q (*5), 5, TNeutral evil (slight lawfultendencies)Jermlaine are a diminutive humanoid race that dwells in tunnelsand ambushes hapless adventurers. They are known by a varietyof names such as jinxkin or bane-midges.Jermlaine appear to be tiny humans dressed in baggy clothingand leather helmets. In fact the “clothing"' is their own saggy skinand pointed heads. The limbs are knottily muscled. The finger¬nails and toenails are thick and filthy, although the fingers andtoes are very nimble. Their gray-brown, warty hide blends inwith natural earth and stone. When they wear rags or scraps asclothing, such items are also camouflage colored.They speak in high-pitched squeaks and twitters. This speechmay be mistaken for the sounds of a bat or rat. They can alsoconverse with all sorts of rats, both normal and monstrous. Eachjermlaine has a 10% chance to understand common, dwarvish,gnomish, goblin, or ore (roll separately for each language).Combafc Termlaine are cowards who have made an art of theambush. They only attack when they feel there is no serious op¬position. They prefer to attack injured, ill, or sleeping victims.They avoid directly confronting strong, alert parlies, althoughthey may try to injure them out of sheer maliciousness. Jermlainepossess weak eyes and infravision that only extends for 30 yards,but their keen smell and hearing enable them to detect even invis¬ible creatures 50% of the Lime. 1 ermlaine move silently andquickly with a scuttling gait (this stealth causes opponents to suf¬fer a -5 penalty to their surprise rolls). They arc 75% undetect¬able, even If listened or watched for, unless the jermlainepurposefully reveal their presence.jermlaine typically arm themselves with needle-sharp darts;they can hurl these 120 yards for 1-2 points of damage. They alsocarry a miniature pike; these l 1 .^-foot-long sticks with sharp tipsinflict ld4 points of damage. If the jermlames are out to capture avictim, they are also armed with blackjacks.The jermlames 1 favorite tactic is capturing victims with nets orpits. In lit tie-used passages the creatures prepare pits covered bycamouflaged doors or string nets overhead. In more-traveledpassages, the jermlaine stretch trip cords. When a victim fallsafoul of a trap, the jermlaine swarm over him. Some pummelhim with blackjacks while others tie him with ropes and cords.Such beatings have a cumulative 2% chance per blow of causingthe victim to lapse into unconsciousness. If a victim is wearingsplint, banded, or plate mail, these pummeling attacks are inef¬fective. Knowing this, the jermlaine attack well-armored victimswith add or flaming oil missiles.Slam victims and 5% of subdued victims are later devoured bythe jermlaine and their rats Most captives are robbed, stripped,shaved totally hairless, and left trussed in a passageway. If anunsuspecting victim pauses near a lurking band of jermlaine,they dart out and cut straps, belts, packs, and pouches. Eachjermlaine in the band makes one such attack before fleeing backinto the shadows. Such attacks are usually not noticed til] ldl2turns later, when the slashed items begin to fall apart. They alsotry to steal, damage, or befoul victims' possessions.When encountered, 25% of jermlaine are accompanied by Idorats and 50% are accompanied by ld6 giant rats (only one typeof rat per group of jermlaine). Groups of 35 or more jermlaine areaccompanied by an elder—a very old jermlaine with the magicalability to drain the magic from most magical items if he can han¬dle such an object for ld4 rounds. Artifacts and relics are im¬mune to such attacks.lermlaine are treated as 4-Hit Die monsters for purposes ofsaving throws and magical attacks. Due to their diminutive size,they escape all damage from attacks that normally do half dam¬age if the saving throw is successful.Habitat/Society: jermlaine are extremely distant relatives of thegnomes. Their deeply rooted sense of inferiority at their own di¬minutive size has become a malicious need to humiliate normal¬sized humanoids. They make a good living preying on haplessadventurers, who provide riches, sadistic amusement, and an oc¬casional meal. Jermlaine acquire a wide variety of treasure, al¬though such items tend to be small objects.The jermlaine life span is one third that of humans. Reproduc¬tion is identical to other humanoids, although cross breeding isimpossible, Jermlaine females give birth to one or two babies at atime. Most (75%) of the offspring are male, although the dangersof their hostile life reduces the male numerical superiority to aneven male-female mix among the adults.lermlaine society is divided among dans whose members areunited by blood. Each dan consists of 4d4 families. The danchief is normally the strongest or most clever of the elders. Thechief both instructs the young jermlaine in the arl of the ambushand leads important attacks (albeit from a secure location in therear). The families center around the mothers, as the fathers maybe unknown, off hunting, or dead. If a female jermlaine has de¬pendent children, she normally concentrates on raising such chil¬dren rather than participating in attacks. As the children mature,she and the clan chief take the young on practice attacks on po¬tential victims and participate in the humiliation of captives.Jermlaine lairs are cunningly hidden and physically impassableby most humanoids, as they are usually a series of small chambersand tunnels scaled to their tiny occupants. The typical jermlainelair is a filthy cave or burrow a short distance from a larger caverncomplex The only areas that can be easily reached by a human¬sized being are the areas in which living captives are held and deadvictims butchered for food. Access past this area is controlled bysmall, one-foot-high corridors or thin, normally impassable cracksin the rock walls. The corridors lead directly to living areas andcommunal chambers. The living areas are furnished with crudefurniture and items scavenged from past victims.Each jermlaine family has a personal section that half resem¬bles a nest, half a junk yard. Treasures are concealed throughoutthe lair. Each family maintains a series of small, personal caches,while the communal hoard is hidden in a series of small chambersat the end of cunningly concealed crawl ways. No one larger thana jermlaine can reach such treasure chambers,Jermlaine get along well with rats of all types. They can speakall rat-related languages. They are 75% likely to be accompaniedby rats and 50% likely to share their lair with rats. This cohabita¬tion extends to all forms of mutual cooperation and defense.There is a 10% chance that the jermlaine colony has a mutualcooperation pact with osquips rather than normal rats.The diet is an omnivorous mixture of Insects, fresh meat, carri¬on, fungi, and molds. Humanoids are a delicacy reserved for spe¬cial occasions. Lizards form the bulk of the meat intake,Jermlaine cherish foods from the surface, even the hardtack andiron rations carried by adventurers. If the jermlaine can identifywhich oi the adventurers* bags carry food, these are stolen as en¬thusiastically as the treasure pouches, Jermlaine have a fondnessfor rarities such as sugar candy, and preserved fruits. Such itemscan be used to entice the normally malevolent jermlaine to leavean adventurer alone, at least temporarily.Ecology: lermlaine are opportunistic brigands who prey on un¬wary travelers in the subterranean regions. They are well awareof any such travelers, including a party's size, composition, andgeneral condition. Jermlaine may be persuaded, for a suitablefee, to share such knowledge with adventurers.Jermlaine may deal with "giants" (any race bigger than theyare) if they are bribed or given access to a plentiful flow of vic¬tims or riches. They never ally themselves with truly good-aligned adventurers, although they may, in a moment ofcraftiness, pretend to enter such an alliance. Regardless of theirspoken intentions, 75% of jermlaine eventually either lie to orturn against their larger '"allies " They may make their lairs nearthe established territories of such races as drow, trolls, or troglo¬dytes. Although they are careful to avoid direct conflict withsuch evil beings, the jermlaine happily prey on the victims oftheir neighbors, as well as scavenging the scenes of their neigh¬bors' battles, Jermlaine may act as watchmen for their neighbors,provided suitable terms can be agreed upon.They unintentionally act as garbagemen, cleaning the subter¬ranean regions. Dead animals may be used as food or supplies,while dead humanoids are taken away to be searched for valu¬ables or used as food. Because of this, adventurers seeking theremains of a slain companion may seek out the local jermlainessince they may be aware of where the remains are located.Half-lion, half-eagle, griffons are ferocious avian carnivores thatprey upon horses and their kin (hippogriffs, pegasi, and uni-corns i. This hunger for horseflesh often brings griffons into di¬rect conflict with humans and demi humans.Adult griffons stand five feet at the shoulder and weigh overhalf a ton. Their head, upper torso, and forelegs are like those ofa giant eagle. This eagle half is covered in golden feathers from itswing tips to its razor-sharp beak. Their powerful foreiimbs endin long, hooked talons. Wings* with a span of 25 feet or more,rise out of their backs. The lower half of a griffon is that of a lion.Dusky yellow lur covers the lion half s muscular rear legs andclawed feet. A lions tail hangs down from the griffon's powerfulrear haunches. Griffons speak no languages, but emit an eagle¬like screech when angered or excited (usually by the smell ofhorse).Combat: Griffons hunt in groups of 12 or less, searching theplains and forests near (within 20 miles) their lair for horses andherd animals. With their superior vision and sense of smell, grif¬fons can spot prey up to two miles distant. If the prey is horse orhorse-kin, griffons are 90% likely to attack even if the horseshave riders. Griffons hunt only for food, so a rider who releasesone or two horses can usually escape unharmed fthough in alllikelihood his horse wont). Any attempt to protect a horsebrings the full fury of the attacking griffons on the protector.When attacking ground targets, griffons use their great sizeand weight to swoop down from above and raking their oppo¬nent with the talons before landing nearby. Griffons always fightto the death if there is horsellesh at stake.In aerial combat, griffons are equally fierce, lunging into battleand tearing at their opponent until they or their prey are dead.Many a griffon has plummeted to its death with a struggling hip-pogriff caught firmly in its grasp,Habitat/Sodety: Griffons prefer rocky habitats, near openplains. Once griffons establish their territory, they remain untilthe food supply has been exhausted.Griffons, like lions, live in prides, with each pride comprisingseveral mated pairs, their young, and one dominant male. Thedominant mate is responsible for settling territorial disputes withother prides and choosing the direction the hunt w ill take.Each pair of mated griffons in the pride has its own nest, lo¬cated near the prides other lairs. Griffon nests are usually situ¬ated in shallow' caves* high along a cliff face.The nests are made of sticks and leaves, as well as an occasion¬al bone, Griffons collect no treasure, but their caves frequentlycontain the remains of unfortunate travelers who tried to protecttheir horses from the grill ons.During spring* female griffons lay one or two eggs that hatchin the late summer. For the first three months griffon young areknown as hatchlings; thereafter, until they mature the young arecalled fledglings. Griffon young grow rapidly for three years un¬til they are large enough to hunt with the pride. Adult griffonsare extremely protective oi their young and attack without mercyany creature that approaches within 100 feet of the nest.Ecology: If trained from a very early age (three years or less),griffons will serve as mounts. The training, however, is bothtime-consuming and expensive, requiring the expertise of an ani¬mal trainer for two years. Once trained, though, griffons makef ierce and loyal steeds, bonding with one master for life, and pro¬tecting him even unto death, A griffon mount knows no fear inbattle, but attacks any horse or horse-kin in preference to otheropponents.Acquiring a griffon fledgling is a very dangerous venture as theadults never stray far from the nest and fight to the death to de¬fend eggs or young. Any given griffon nest is 75% likely to con¬tain one or two fledglings or eggs. Fledgling griffons sell for 5,000gold pieces on the open market; eggs sell for 2,000 gold pieceseach.Powerfully-built humanoids dad only in dark, filthy rags, thesewarlike subterranean creatures emerge from their deep caverns atnight to search for unlucky humans to add to their larders,Grimlocks have thick, scaly, grey skirt and long, black, filthyhair. Their teeth are white and extremely sharp. Their eyes areblank white orbs,Grimlocks are totally blind, but have highly developed sensesof smell and hearing. Their sensitive ears and noses combine toallow them to distinguish objects and creatures within 20just aswell as if they were able to see.Combat; Grimlocks are immune to the effects of spells which af¬fect the vision. These include p haniasmal force. darkness , invisi¬bility. mirror image r and many others. However, spells such asaudible glarner or any loud, continuous noise will partiallyblind' them. This reduces their ability to perceive opponents toa 10 r range and makes them -2 on their attack rolls. Substancessuch as snuff or strong perfumes will have much the same effect ifinhaled by a grimlock or thrown in its face.Grimlocks attack fiercely but with little or no organization,often stopping in the middle of battle to carry off fallen foes orcomrades for food. For every 10 grimlocks encountered, therewill be a leader of 3 Hit Dice and AC 4, for every 40 there will bea champion of 4 Hit Dice and AC 3. These exceptional individ¬uals will usually be the only ones to show even the most elemen¬tal strategy, usually by allowing their followers to weakenopponents before entering battle themselves.Grimlocks will nearly always attack m darkness if possible.While not adversely affected by light, they are intelligent enoughto realize that in total darkness, their unique form of perceptiongives them a distinct advantage.Though able to attack with their hands (for 1-6 hp damage),grimlocks prefer edged weapons and will usually (90% chance)be armed as follows: hand-axe, 20%; battle-axe, 15%; two*handed sword, 15%; bastard sword, 15%; broad sword, 15%;long sword, 20%.Leaders or champions will always be armed with a battle-axeor two-handed sword.Grimlocks, whether normal, leader, or champion, make allsaving throws as oth-level fighters. Grimlocks gain a +1 on sur¬prise rolls, since their acute hearing allows them to communicatein voices too faint for other races to hear. In addition, their mo¬rale Is raised by 1 for every leader or champion with the group.Habitat Society: Grimlocks lair in vast cavern complexes inmountainous areas. They are well adapted to these environs. Inany rocky terrain they blend in so well that, while motionless,they are completely undetectable—unless one actually bumps in¬to them. In any grimlock lair, there will be nearly as many fe¬males (1 Hit Die and AC 6) as males, and at least as many young(1 hit point, AC 6 and non-combatant), Grimlock leaders andchampions do wield some control over these communities. How¬ever, this control is usually effective only as long as the leaderwho gave the order is around to enforce his will. It is nearly im¬possible for those of other races to tell one grimlock fromanother—although leader types may appear slightly larger—butthey easily tell each other apart by subtle differences in scent andmovement.Extremely xenophobic, grimlocks rarely consort with otherraces. However, there is a small (10%) chance that they will al¬low medusae to share their lairs, and a 2 % chance that any wan¬dering group will be accompanied by 1-2 mind flayers.Ecology: Grimlocks will only eat the raw flesh of humanoid crea¬tures, vastly preferring that of humans to all others. Foragingparties often raid the homes of oLher subterranean races, espe¬cially those who keep large slave populations (such as drow).They are often on good terms with mind flayers since illithidshave a large supply of humanoid bodies discarded after theyhave devoured the brains, Grimlocks are particularly hated bygithyanki for this reason. Since the slave flesh the grimlocks of¬ten consume (raw) is frequently unwholesome, whole communi¬ties are often decimated by disease.
Grippli resemble smalt intelligent, humanoid tree frogs. Theyare have a primitive culture and are nonaggressive.They stand 2- ^ feet tall and weigh 25 to 30 pounds. Theirbodies are shaped like those of frogs, except for the human-likehands and hand-like feet. Their eyes are yellow with vertical slitpupils. Their skin is gray-green with camouflage stripes andswirling patterns. Although their skin looks wet and shiny, it isactually dry to the touch. Grippli smell of old, wet vegetation*They love bright colors and eagerly acquire any such items.They wear clothing only for decoration or for a particular func¬tional purpose, such as for pockets. A normal encounter withgrippli outside of the village finds them wearing only thin belts orloin doths to hold weapons or acquired items.They speak a language of croaks, groans, dicks, andsqueaks. In a tribe there is usually at least one member that canspeak either common, elvish, or some other jungle humanoids'language. When speaking any language but their own, they arebarely understandable because of the croaking resonances intheir speech,Combat: Because of the grippli's coloring, opponents suffer a" 3 penalty to their surprise rolls. Grippli defend themselves withsnares, nets, poisoned darts, and the occasional sword or dagger.Any metal weapons must be manufactured elsewhere for thegrippli, so swords are rare. They can adapt to use any weapons,and they have been known to use spears and blow guns on rareoccasions. They never wear armor. Generally speaking the grip¬pli prefer small weapons that don't get in the way of climbing,A grippli can dimb trees or non-sheer rock at its normal move¬ment rate, thanks to its unusual hands and feet. When keepingstill among vegetation, a gripplfs natural camouflage causes a -3 penalty to its opponents' surprise rolls. They have infravisiongood up to 10 yards, which means they can operate at night al¬most as well as during the day.They are very capable of formulating strategies and tactics toovercome a larger, more powerful force, Grippli prefer ambushesand traps to most other strategies* By trapping their opponents insnares and nets, they can hurl darts at them safely from high inthe trees. If unprovoked, they attack only to steal various bright¬ly colored baubles.Habitat/Society: A grippli tribal village is made of small huts ofwood and mud built on the ground, in the deep shadows of largetrees. On rare occasions, a grippli village is found in the stronglimbs of the trees. Each village is led by a tribe mother (AC 7, HD3, Xd6 + 1 points of damage with a weapon). Once per day thetribe mother can emit a musk cloud, which is treated as a stinkingcloud spell. She looks like any other grippli, except for being al¬most four feet tall. She has ld3 mates of larger than normal size(AC 8, HD 2. Id4 + 1 points of damage with poisoned weapons),standing three to three-and-a-half feet tall. The tribe mother issupposed to have a touch of the blood of their god in her.A typical village has 5d6 males capable of defending it* Thereare an equal number of noncombatant females and ld6 offspring,also noncombatants. They have basic family units, just like hu¬mans, and each family has its own hut. The tribe mothers hutdoubles as a temple to their small, frog-like deity. Other deities inthe pantheon include evil snake gods and spider goddesses*Their natural high intelligence enables them to learn new de¬vices and weapons quickly and easily. As a race they have nodesire to manufacture such items themselves. However, they willtrade tor them with other races. Trade items usually include rarefruits or other hard-to-get jungle specimens. They are extremelycautious and only develop trade relations with groups that theytrust completely such as good elves or the rare village ot goodhumans in their area.Ecology: Grippli s eat fruit and insects. They trap small insectsin large quantities and hunt the giant varieties like humans huntstags. They are in turn hunted by most large, ground- and tree-based predators. Giant snakes and spiders in particular are fondoi grippli as meals,Grippli are rare in the world, mostly because of their lowbirthrate. They live to be 700 years old, but give birth to only sixor so young in that time. Because of this, the grippli defend theiryoung ferociously.Hags are witch-like beings that spread havoc and destruction,working their magics, and slaying all whom they encounter.Hags appear as wretched old women, with long, frayed hair, andwithered faces. Horrid moles and warts dot their blotchy skin, theirmouths are filled with blackened teeth, and their breath is most foul.Though wrinkled and skinny, hags possess supernatural strengthand can easily crush smaller creatures, such as goblins, with onehand. Similarly though hags look decrepit, they run swiftly easilybounding over rocks or logs in their path. From the long, skinnyfingers of hags grow iron-like daws, Hags use these daws (and theirsupernatural strength) to rend and tear at opponents in combat.Their garb is similar to that of peasant women, but usually muchmore tattered and filthyCombat: The combat abilities of hags vary with each type (seebelow for details), but all hags possess the following: 18/00Strength or greater, some level of magic resistance, and the spell-like ability to change self at will. Hags use this last ability to at-tract victims, frequently posing as young human or demihumanfemales, helpless old women, or occasionally as ores or hobgob¬lins. A disguised hag reveals her true form and leaps to the attackwhen weak opponents come near. Against well armed and ar¬mored parties, hags maintain their disguise and employ furthertrickery designed to place the intended victim in a more vulnera¬ble position. This trickery can take any of several forms, includ¬ing verbal persuasion, leading the victim into a prearranged trap,and so on.The one weakness of hags is their arrogance. Hags have great dis¬dain for the mental abilities of all humans and demihumans and,though hags are masterful employers of disguise, clever charactersmay be able to glean a hag's true nature through conversation.Habitat. Society: Hags live alone or in coveys of three. They al¬ways choose desolate, out-ot-the-way places in which to dwell.They sometimes coexist with ogres or evil giants. The former actas servants or guards for hags, but giants are treated with respect(for obvious reasons) and often cooperate with hags to accom¬plish acts of great evil against the outside world.While individually powerful, hags are much more dangerouswhen formed into a covey. A covey is composed of three hags of anycombination (e,g., two annis and a green hag, three annis, etc.).Coveys have special powers that individual hags don't possess.These powers include the fallowing spells: curse, polymorph other,animate dead , dream, control weather, veil forcecage. vision , andmind blank . Covey spells can each be used once per day, and takeeffect as if they were cast by a 9th-levd spellcastcr. To cast one ofthese spells, the members of the covey must all be within TO feet ofeach other and the spell being cast must be in lieu of all other attacks.Coveys never cast these spells in combat, instead these spellsare used to help weave wicked plots against neighboring humanor demihuman settlements. A common ploy by coveys is to forceor trick a victim into performing some heinous deed. This deedusually involves bringing back more victims, some of whom aredevoured by the hags: the rest are used on Further evil assign¬ments. Any creature fortunate (or unfortunate) enough to resist acovey is immediately devoured.A covey of hags is 80% likely to be guarded by a mixture ofld8 ogres and ld4 evil giants, Coveys often use one or two oftheir ogres as spies, sending them into the world beyond afterpoly morphing them into less threatening creatures.These minions frequently (60%) wear a special magical gem calleda hag eye. A hag eye is made from the real eye of a covey's previousvictim. It appears to the casual observer to be no more than a low-value gem (20 gp or less), but if viewed through a gem of true seeing ,a disembodied eye can be seen trapped in the hag eves interior. Thishidden eye is magically connected to the covey that created the hageye. All three members of the covey can see whatever the hag eye ispointed at. Hag eyes are usually placed on a medallion or broochworn by one of the hags polymorphed servants. Occasionally hageyes are given as gifts to unsuspecting victims whom the hags wantto monitor. Destroying a hag eye inflicts Id 10 points of damage toeach member of the covey that created it, and one of the three hags isstruck blind for 24 hours.Hags commonly inhabit bone-strewn glens deep within for¬ests. There is an 80% chance that hags are keeping one or twocaptives in a nearby earthen pit or forcecage. These prisoners areheld for a purpose known only to the hags themselves, though itwill certainly involve spreading chaos into the outside world.Prisoners kept in a pit are guarded by an evil giant or one to twoogres; those in a forcecage are lefL alone.Ecology: Hags have a ravenous appetite and are able to devourman-sized creatures in just 10 rounds. They prefer human flesh, butsettle for ore or demihuman when necessary. This wanton destruc-tion has earned hags some powerful enemies. Besides humanity ingeneral, both good giants and good dragons hunt hags, slaying themwhenever possible. Still hags multiply rapidly by using theirchange self ability to appear as beautiful maidens to men they en¬counter alone. Hag offspring are always female. Legends say thathags can change their unborn child for that of a human female whileshe sleeps. They further state that any mother who brings such achild to term Is then slain by the hag-child she carries. Fortunately,such ghastly tales have never been proven.Hags hoard tine treasure, using the jewelry and coins to deco¬rate the bones of their more powerful victims, and the finer gems(500 gp value or higher) to manufacture magical img eyes.The largest and most powerful of all the hags, annis stand sevento eight feet tail. Their skin is deep blue in complexion, whiletheir hair, teeth, and nails are glossy black. The eyes of an annisare dull green or yellow Annis have norma] intravision (60-footrange), but superior hearing and sense of smell. Annis are sur¬prised only on a 1 on ldlO.An annis attacks using its talons and teeth to inflict horriblewounds. In melee, annis tend to dose and grapple. An annis thathits an opponent with all three of its attacks in one round hassuccessfully grappled its opponent. Next round, all attacks by theannis are automatic hits, unless the opponent is stronger, the an¬nis is slam, or the victim uses some magical means to escape thehag. Otherwise, the annis will continue to hold the victim in itsgrasp, and deliver damage with its raking talons and sharpenedteeth each round until the victim is slain.In addition to normal attacks, annis have the ability to cast fogcloud three times per day. This spell is used to confuse resistanceor to delay attack by a superior foe. Annis can also change selflike all hags, appearing as a tall human, ogre, or even a smallgiant. These spells are cast at 8th level for purposes of determin¬ing spell range, duration, etc,The skin of an annis is iron-hard; thus edged weapons cause 1less point of damage when they hit these hags. Conversely, bluntweapons {including morning stars) cause 1 additional point ofdamage against an anms.Annis speak thdr own language, as well as ogre, all evil gianttongues, and some common. Some of the most intelligent anniscan speak common fluently and know a smattering of variousdemihuman languages. Annis are believed to live for 500 years.These wretched creatures live in desolate countryside and amiddense forests and swamps. Greenhags. as their name implies,have a sickly green pallor. Hair color ranges from near black toolive green, and their eyes are amber or orange. Their skin ap¬pears withered but is hard and rough like the bark of a tree. Dueto their coloration and their ability to move with absolute si¬lence, greenhags impose a -5 penalty to an opponent's surpriseroll when in a forest or swamp They have superior hearing,smell, and sight, including infravision (90-foot range). They areonly surprised on a roll of 1 on the ldlO surprise roll.Rock-hard talons grow from the long, slender fingers ofgreenhags. They use these talons to slash and rend their oppo¬nents. Smaller than their annis cousins, greenhags nonethelesspossess Strength equivalen t to that of an ogre (18/00). Because oftheir great Strength, all their attack rolls gain a +3 bonus and allhits receive a +6 damage bonus.Greenhags can cast the following spells at will, one spell perround; audible glamor dancing lights, invisibility, pass withouttrace, change self , speak with monsters, water breathing, andweakness. Each spell is employed at 9th level of ability.To Vure victims, greenhags typically use their mimic ability.This enables them to imitate the voice of a mature or immaturemale or female, human or demihuman. Calls lor help and cryingare common deceptions employed by greenhags. They are alsoable to mimic most animals.Greenhags speak their own language (a dialect of annis) as wellas all demihuman languages and common. These are the longestlived of all hags—they can live for up to 1.000 years.These, the most wretched of all hags, inhabit thickly vegetatedshallows in warm seas and, very rarely overgrown lakes. Warts,bony protrusions, and patches of slimy green scales dot theirsickly yellow skin. Their eyes are always red with deep, blackpupils T Long, seaweed-like hair hangs limply from their heads,covering their withered bodies.Sea hags hate beauty, attempting to destroy it wherever it isencountered. Sea hags can change self at will, and often use thisability to draw their victims within 30 feet before revealing them¬selves, The true appearance of a sea hag is so ghastly that anyoneviewing one of these hag;* grows weak from fright unless a suc¬cessful saving throw vs. spell is rolled. Beings that fail their sav¬ing throw Jose */a ot their Strength for ldb turns. Worse still, seahags can cast a deadly glance up to three times a day. This lookaffects one creature of the sea hags choosing within 30 feet. Tonegate the effects of this glance, the victim must successfully savevs, poison. If the saving throw is failed, the victim either diesimmediately from fright {25% chance) or falls stricken and is par¬alysed for three days (75% chance). Few' who survive the glancelive to tell of it, for sea hags quickly devour their helpless victims.Sea hags always use their deadly glance as their primary formof attack; they will melee, but only if they have the advantage ofnumbers. Unlike other hags, sea hags use daggers in combat, re¬ceiving a +3 bonus to their attack roll and a +6 damage bonus,due to their ogre-like Strength.Sea hags speak their own language as well as common and thelanguages of annis, and sea elves, and live for 800 years.Halflings are a hard-working race of peaceful citizens* Their communitiesare similar to those of humans, although they usually contain many bur¬row homes in addition to surface cottages.Half!mgs average 3 feet in height, have ruddy completions, with sandyto dark brown hair, and blue or hazel eyes. Their dress is often colorfulbut serviceable, and they like to wear caps or tunics. In addition to theirown language, many halflings also speak the common tongue, gnome,goblin, and ortish.Combat; Halflings will fight with great ferocity in defense of good ortheir homes. They are very skilled with both the sling and the bow {re¬ceiving a +3 bonus on all attack rolls) and use these weapons to greatadvantage in battle- Their tactics often involve feints to draw their at¬tackers into the open where they can be subjected to a volley of fire fromcover.When equipped for battle halflings wear padded or leather armor. A half-ling force b usually armed with short swords and hand axes. In addition, two-thirds of the halflings will be carrying either a sling or short bow.All halflings above normal level will have Armor Class 6, while those of3rd or 4th level wear chain mail over their leather ( AC 4). Higher level half-lings have a 10 percent chance per level of having a magic weapon or armor.As all halflings are naturally resistant to magic and poisons—they saveat 4 levels above their actual level In addition, half lings are exceedinglyclever at quiet movement and hiding. In combat, their opponents receivea -5 on their surprise roll. In natural terrain halflings are considered irmrs-ible w T hen they arc hiding in vegetation.Habitat Society: Halfling villages will generally have between 30 and 300(30dl0t individuals living in them. For every 30 halfling* in a particularcommunity there will be two 2nd-level fighters and a 3rd-level priest. Ifmore than 90 halflings are encountered there will be an additional leaderof 3rd-level fighting ability. If more than 150 are encountered there willalso be the following additional haflling warriors in the group; one 9th-lcvel fighter, two 4th-level fighters and three 3rd-level fighters. Further acommunity of 150 halflings will have a Sth-level priest.Cheerful and outgoing, halflings, take great pleasure in simple craftsand nature. Their fingers, though short, are very dexterous allowingthem to create objects of great beauty. Halflings shun water and extremesin temperature*, preferring to settle in temperate pastoral countrysides.They get along well with humans and receive a +2 bonus to all theirReaction Rolls involving human NPCsEcology: Halflings hunt occasionally, but prefer breads, vegetables andfruits, with an occasional pheasant on the side. They have a life expectan¬cy of 100 years on the average.A taller 14' + ) and slimmer haJfhng with fair skin and hair, tallfellows aresomewhat rare among the halfling folk, Tallfellows generally speak thelanguage of elves* in addition to those listed previously and greatly enjoytheir company. In combat, tallfellows often ride pontes and carry- spearsor small lances. Tallfellows of strength 17 or more can rise In 6th levelfighting ability. They live ISO years on average. Like elves, a tallfdlowcan recognize a secret door on a roll of Iona Ido, All tall fellows receive a+ 2 bonus to surprise rolls when in forest or wooded terrain.These- halflings are shorter and stockier than the more common hairfoots.Stouts take great pleasure In gems and fine masonry, often work ing as jewel¬ers or stone cutlers. They rarely mix with humans and elves, but enjoy thecompany of dwarves and often speak their language fluently, Like dwarves,stouts have mfravision (60"), a 75% chance to detect sloping passageways,and a 50% chance of determining direction when underground. Stouts with astrength score of 17 or better can work their way up to the Qlh-levd of fight¬ing ability. Their ties with the dwarven folk have spilled over into their com¬bat tactics, with many stouts employing hammers and momingstars incombat. Stouts also have no fear of water and, in fact, many are excellentswimmers, Stouts, can reach an age of 140 or more years.
Harpies are wicked avian beasts that prey upon nearly all crea¬tures but prefer the flesh of humans and dermhumans.Harpies have the bodies of vultures but the upper torsos andheads of women. Their human features are youthful, but hid¬eous. with frayed unkempt hair and decaying teeth. A foul odorsurrounds all harpies and that which they touch. Harpies neverbathe nor clean themselves in any way Their dress, if anything,is limited to tattered rags and shiny trinkets taken from previousvictims.The language of harpies, in contrast to their enticing song, is ahorrible collection of cackles and shrieks. Although there are in¬stances of harpies which could speak the languages of other crea¬tures, these are few and far between .Combat: The song of the harpies has the ability to charm allhumans and demihumans who hear it (elves are resistant to thecharm). Those who fail their saving throw versus spell will pro¬ceed towards the harpy with all possible speed, only to stand en¬tranced while the harpy slays them at its leisure. This charm willlast as long as the harpy continues to sing. Harpies can sing evenwhile engaged in melee.It is impossible to fend off a harpv song simply by claspinghands over ears because the charm takes effect the moment thefirst note is heard. Characters making prior preparations to blockout the sound, [wax in ears, etcj. are immune to the effects of thesong. In addition, characters who make their saving throw arethereafter immune to its effect, until such time as they encountera different group of harpies.If forced to fight, harpies can do so quite effectively by deliver¬ing a vicious bite and raking simultaneously with their talons.About 50% of all harpies encountered will use weapons, usuallya bone club (damage 1-8) which they wield surprisingly well.The touch of a harpy upon a charmed individual has a similar,though somewhat less potent, effect. Those who are touched andmiss their saving throw versus spell will stand mesmerized for20 + ldl0 hours.The effect of either charm is broken if the harpy is slain.Habitat Society: Harpies make their home upon coastlines inregions near shipping lanes and by well-traveled paths. Therethey use their song to lure travelers to their doom,Their lair is usually a shallow cave, which they defile until noanimal dare approach it. Here they remain unless hunting. Har¬pies often carry victims back to their lair to devour them In morefamiliar surroundings.Harpies have little use for treasure, other than the shiny bau¬bles which they often attach to their clothes. Other items, such asgold and weapons, are frequently interspersed amongst the filthand bones that litter the cave. This refuse can reach a depth ofseveral feet in the oldest of harpy lairs.A typical harpy lair houses about a half-dozen of these wretch¬ed creatures. No male harpies have ever been seen and it seemsthat harpies can reproduce at will by laying a single egg everyother year. Harpies take no care of their young, which live offcarcasses and cave vermin until they themselves are old enoughto sing and hunt.Harpies have no social structure, frequently quarreling overwho gets what part of a victim and when to stop the torturingand start the feasting. Occasionally these quarrels will turn vio¬lent, so that more than one harpy feast has begun with the lastminute addition of the losing harpy to the menu.Harpies will occassionally agree to cooperate in evU acts withother humanoids.Ecology: Harpies hunt all manner of beasts, remaining in anarea for as long as the food supply lasts. They are despised andgreatly feared by all creatures weaker than themselves.Harpies have a voracious appetite, devouring all manner ofman and beast. They take great delight in torture, and frequentlykill for pleasure. Slain victims which harpies do not eat are sim¬ply left to rot.Their life span is unknown but seems to be about 50 years.
Hatori, sometimes called the ' crocodiles of the sands" are giantreptiles dwelling within sandy desert wastes. The baton's hard,knobby hide ranges in color from gray-white to red-brown and isvirtually indistinguishable from stone, Hatori use this semblanceto great advantage, allowing the wind to partially bury them be¬neath the sands so that a casual observer may believe he is look¬ing at rock outcroppings instead of behemoths of the sands.Hatori are shaped like overgrown lizards, save that their legshave evolved into flat, flipper-like appendages that they use inconjunction with their massive tails to "swim" through the sandswith astonishing speed and mobility. When forced to travel uponsomething more solid, such as a rocky plain, hatori move byawkwardly flopping and dragging themselves forward. Hatorieyes are normally concealed deep within dark recesses that looklike small hollows. In the case of greater hatori (6 HD and over)these recesses sometimes look like cavern entrances.Greater hatori are identical to lesser hatori in all respects savesize and their ability to swallow larger prey whole (see below).Combat: The only thing that can drive hatori into combat ishunger. Unfortunately, hatori have voracious appetites and foodis rare in their home environment, so they never pass up an op¬portunity to make a meal out of a passing traveler—or even anentire caravan. The baton's favorite hunting method is to posi¬tion themselves along a well-used migratory trail or caravanroute. When, believing the hatori to be no more than a rockyoutcropping, a prospective meal passes nearby, the hatori springinto action.Once the battle begins, hatori try to bite their victims withtheir toothy maws. Greater hatori swallow' man-sized victimswhole on a natural attack roll of 20. Such victims suffer ld!2points of damage per round from the crushing and acid effects ofthe digestive tract. Swallowed victims cannot escape until the ba¬ton is killed, for the muscular action of the esophagus preventsthem from climbing out the throat.Hatori use their bony tails to lash out at anyone attacking fromthe rear, or to attack fleeing victims while simultaneously tryingto eat someone elseLesser hatori can swallow whole only opponents of Lender sizeor less (on a natural attack roll of 20). Experience points earnedfor defeating a hatori depend upon its number of HD. See Tables31 and 32 on page 47 of the 2nd Edition Dungeon Masters Guideto compute the XP values.Habitat/Society: Hatori live in the sandy regions of large des¬erts. Because they are constantly searching for food, however,they tend to be found near migratory paths or along busy cara¬van routes. They stay in a productive area until food becomesscarce.Hatori grow very slowly, at the rate of only 1-foot per year,but they keep growing throughout their lives. They accumulateHit Dice at the rate of 1 HD every 10 years. Therefore, younghatori of 1 HD are usually 10 feet or less in length and 10 yearsold or younger, hatori of 2 HD are between 10 and 20 feet andbetween 10 and 20 years of age, etc.Females care for their hatchlings until the young reach 50 feetin length (5 HD), This is the only time when they are commonlyencountered in groups, for adult hatori are solitary creatures. Fe¬male hatori accompanied by hatchlings seldom exceed 10 HD,for they generally stop bearing young after their 100th yeanEvery 10 years, male hatori and young females without anyoffspring migrate to the center of the desert. Here the males en¬gage in ferocious battles to win the right to breed with the fe¬males. Although no civilized man has ever witnessed thesemating rituals, certain desert tribes speak of a "time of thunderwhen mountains die," These legends may refer to battles occur¬ring during the hatori mating season.Ecology Hatori eat anything, though they cannot digest gems ormagical armor and weaponry; These items tend to accumulate intheir stomachs over their long lifetimes. Hatori have no naturalpredators (save for each other at mating time), though it is rumoredthat certain kinds of dragons have been known to attack smaller ba¬ton in times of hunger. Legends speak of a hidden hatori burialground where ancient hatori go to die. If such a burial ground exists,it certainly abounds with gems and magical armor.
(Note: Statistics separated by a slash: those to the left refer to thenatural state, those to the right are for a possessed victimJA haunt is the restless spirit of a person who died leaving somevital task unfinished. Its sole purpose is to take over a living bodyand use it to complete the task, thus gaining a final release fromthis world.Haunts may assume either of two forms, at will: a hoveringluminescent ball of light (identical in appearance to a wilTo-wisp)or a nebulous, translucent image of the haunt's former body. Inthe later state, haunts look like groaning spirits, spectres, orghosts, and are often mistaken for them. Transformation fromone state to the other takes one round.Combat: A haunt must remain within 60 yards of where it died,unless it lakes control of a victim's body, This 60-yard radius iscalled the haunt’s domain.A haunt attacks mindlessly, and always targets the first humanor demihuman that enters its domain. It will continue to attackuntil possession is achieved or the intended victim leaves thehaunt s domain.The touch of a haunt drains 2 points of Dexterity per hit. Asthe character s Dexterity is drained, he suffers not only the penal¬ties of lowered Dexterity but increasing numbness creeps overhis body. If Dexterity reaches G r the haunt slips Into the body andpossesses it. Once the body is possessed, Dexterity returns tonormalThe haunt uses the host's body to complete its unfulfilled task.The task need not be dangerous, although it often Is. Once thetask is completed, the haunt passes on to its final rest and thevictim regains control of his body. When the haunt leaves a vic¬tim, the character has a Dexterity of 3. Lost Dexterity points areregained at the rate of 1 point for each turn of complete rest. If ahaunt's possessed body is slain, it will haunt the place where thatbody was killed.If the victim has an alignment opposite to that of the haunt(good vs. evil), the haunt will try to strangle the victim using thevictim s own hands. Unless the victim s arms are being restrained,the strangulation begins the round after the haunt takes controlof the body. On the first round the victim suffers 1 point of dam¬age,, on the second 2, on the third 4, and so on, doubling eachround until the victim is dead or the haunt is driven off.Attacks on a possessed character will cause full damage to thecharacter's body, If attacked, the haunt will use whatever weap¬ons and armor the victim carries, but it cannot use any items thatwould require special knowledge (spells, scrolls, rings t The onlysafe way to tree the victim is by casting fro/d person or dispel evil(good). If ho/d person is cast, the haunt must make a successfulsaving throw vs, paralyzation or be ejected from the body: dispelevil {good) destroys the haunt forever.Haunts are linked to the sites where they died and thereforecannot be turned by priests. When in the natural state (i.e., notpossessing a body) haunts may be struck only by silver or magi¬cal weapons, or by fire. Weapons cause only 1 point of damage,plus the magical bonus (if any). Normal fire causes 1 point ofdamage per round, but magical fire inflicts full damage. If ahaunt is reduced to 0 hit points, it loses control of its form andfades away. The haunt reforms in one W'eek to haunt the samelocation again until its task is completed.HabitatSodety; The exact task to be accomplished varies, butthe motives are always powerful—revenge, greed, love, hateOften great distances need to be traveled before a task can becompleted, and haunts will drive their hosts mercilessly towardthe goal, ignoring the need for food or sleep.A few haunts (10%) retain some knowledge of their formerlives and can be communicated with. Often these haunts feel re¬morse at having to prey upon the living, but the force of the un¬completed task is too powerful for the haunt to resist.Ecology: Haunts cling to this world by force of will alone. Theyhave no treasure of their own unless it is connected to their questThey prey only on humans and demihumans.
Hell hounds are fire-breathing canines from another plane of ex¬istence brought here in the service of evil beings,A hell hound resembles a large hound with rust-red or red-brown fur and red glowing eyes. The markings, teeth, andtongue arc soot black- Lt stands two to three feet high at theshoulder, and has a distinct odor of smoke and sulfur. The bayingsounds it makes have an eerie, hollow tone that send a shiverthrough any who hear them.Combat Hell hounds are clever hunters that operate in packs.They do not bay like normal dogs while hunting. They movewith great stealth, imposing a -5 penalty to opponents 1 surpriserolls. One or two of the pack sneak up on a quarry while theothers form a ring around it. The first hell hound then springsfrom ambush, attacks the nearest victim, and attempts to drivethe others toward the rest of the pack, If the prey does not runaway the rest of the pack closes in within Td4 +2 rounds. If hellhounds are pursuing fleeing prey they might bayHell hounds attack first by breathing fire at an opponent up to10 yards away. The fire causes 1 point of damage for each of thehell hounds Hit Dice, A successful saving throw' vs, breath weap¬on cuts the damage in half. The hell hound then attacks with itsteeth. The hell hound can continue to exhale flame while biting.If the hell hound rolls a natural 20 on its attack roll, it grabs avictim in its jaws and breathes fire on the victim.Hell hounds have a variety of defenses. They are Immune tofire. Their keen hearing means they are surprised only on a I or 2on IdlO. They can also see hidden or invisible creatures 50% ofthe time.Habitat Society; Hell hounds are native to those extradimen-sional planes notable for their hot, fiery landscapes. There theyroam in packs of 2d20 beasts. The hell hounds on the Prime Ma¬terial plane are summoned there to serve the needs of evil crea¬tures. Most of them later escape to the wild.Hell hounds may have 4 to 7 (1 d4 4^3) Hit Dice, The more HitDice a hdl hound has, the larger it is and the more damage itcauses. Each pack is led by a 7-Hit Die hell hound. The leaderdrives off other 7 HD rivals, w T ho form their own packs.The diet of hell hounds is similar to that of normal canines.They roam a wide area of ldlD + 4 square miles centered on theirden. Pack territories may overlap.They do not easily reproduce on the Prime Material plane. On¬ly 5% of encounters include puppies. Such puppies are bom inlitters of 2d4. They burp flame uncontrollably at feast once a day.The flames are harmless aside from the tendency to set fire toanything flammable in the area. Newborn puppies are at 10% ofthe adult growth; they quickly grow an additional 5% eachmonth and reach full adult growth (4 HD) in Vfi years. Whilegrowing they can attack with their incendiary bite. Hell houndpuppies up to two months old inflict 1 point of damage. Olderones add an additional 1 point for each additional six months ofgrowth.Prey is usually eaten where it is slain, though hell hounds occa¬sionally haul a carcass back to their den for later meals. Hellhounds are also similar to normal canines in that they may act asretrieves Some objects are specifically sought; this is especiallythe case in trained hell hounds. Other hell hounds are simplyplayful and use the retrieved items as toys. They especially likenoisy bags and pouches filled with their late victims' treasures.Flammable containers eventually burn and spill their contents inor around the den. Parchments are rarely found here unless pro¬tected by nonflammable containers.Ecology; Hell hounds have little place in the ecology of the nor¬mal world. They are dangerous annoyances prone to cause fireswherever they hunt. Hell hounds cause more forest fires than anyother creature except for humanoids. Hell hounds have their us¬es, though. Because of their ability to easily detect hidden or in¬visible creatures, hell hounds make excellent watch dogs,especially for intelligent monsters such as fire giants.Hell hounds can be domesticated if raised from puppies, butthere is a 10% chance each year that domesticated hell hounds gowild.
Hit only by silver or +1weaponsSee belowM (5'-T tall)The heucuva is an undead spirit similar in appearance to a skele¬ton, but more dangerous and more difficult to dispel.The heucuva appears to be a humanoid skeleton of normalsize. The bones are covered by a robe that is little more than tat¬tered rags.Combat: The heucuva attacks by swiping with one of its hands;the sharp Huger bones are capable ot tearing into wood. A victimmust roll a successful saving throw vs, poison or be afflicted witha disease. The victim suffers a daily loss of 1 point each ofStrength and Constitution. A cure disease spell must be cast onthe victim to prevent death and restore the lost points.Heucuva are treated as wights on the Turning Undead table.They are resistant to all mind-influencing spells. Heucuva bonessoon crumble once the monsters are destroyed.Heucuva have a special hatred of priests. Once a priest uses hisspells or tries to turn the heucuva, they will concentrate on at¬tacking that priest. They may even ignore everyone else exceptfor the priest and those defending him.Heucuva are able to polymorph themselves up to three times aday. They may use this power to assume a nonthreatening shapein order to get dose to an unsuspecring victim or avoid an unde¬sired encounter when pursuing a specific prey Heucuva may as¬sume the form of people they have met in the recent past, such asa past victim or a member of the party that encounters the mon¬sters, If the heucuva are In their lairs, they may assume their old(livingl appearances- Groups encountered on the surface may ap¬pear to be pilgrims in procession< Such disguises fool only thosewho view the world solely via visible light; heucuva appear thesame as other skeletal undead if looked at with infravision. Theheucuva are incapable of speech; they can only moan or wail.Habitat Society Heucuva roam the dark places of the world.They can be found in subterranean realms, as well as most tem¬perate or tropical regions. Cold seems to prevent heucuvan activ¬ity for they are not found in high, desolate mountains or in anycold regions.Legends tell that heucuva are the restless Spirits of monasticpriests who were less than faithful to their holy vows. In punish¬ment for their heresies, they are forced to roam the dark, Theirspirits, appearance* and holy powers have become pervertedmockeries of their old selves. The tatters they wear are the unrec¬ognizable remains of their monks robes. Instead of healing, theycan kill with a diseased touch. Instead of helping others, theyseek to kill all who still Jive. Even their old power to turn undeadis now used to help them resist the efforts of others to turn them,Heucuva retain dim memories of their old lives. Their lairs aredecorated as grotesque mockeries of their old abbeys and tem¬ples, Tire corpses of past victims may be used to represent parish¬ioners. These corpses may retain their original possessions,which may represent a large portion of the heucuvan treasuretrove. Other accumulated treasures may be scattered around themock altar as decorations or offerings. Such a mock temple is achilling sight to most and an abomination that few good-alignedcleric can resist destroying.Some heucuva are nomadic and constantly wander on a pil¬grimage to nowhere. Even these are mockeries of real pilgrim¬ages.Ecology: Heucuva are malignant spirits that seek to destroythose who still live. They are used as examples to remind prieststhe fate that befalls those who stray from their devotion or usetheir religion as a mask to hide unpious deeds. Powderedheucuva bones may be used in the preparation of magical itemsintended to corrupt the spirits of living beings or to control un¬dead.
The hippocampus is the most prized of the marine steeds, a crea¬ture that combines features of a horse and a fish.The hippocampus has the head, forelegs, and torso of a horse.The equine section is covered with short hair. The mane is madeof long, flexible fins. The front hooves are replaced by webbedtins that fold up as the leg moves forward, then fan out as the legstrokes back. Past the rib cage the body becomes fish-like. Thetail tapers 14 feet into a wide horizontal fin. A dorsal fin is lo¬cated on the rump. Coloration is that of seawater. Typical colorsinclude ivory pale green, pale blue, aqua, deep blue, and deepgreen.Combat: Hippocampi are usually peaceful creatures. They donot attack unless cornered or if another hippocampus or an allyis threatened. They are fast enough to out-swim most anythingthat would want to attack them.The hippocampus attacks with a strong bite. It suddenly ex¬tends its head, chomps down with a crushing bite, and then re¬leases. Hippocampi do not hold onto their opponents.Hippocampi also butt their heads against targets. Such attacksmay stun an opponent or break his bones.Their firm, powerfully muscled bodies provide a strong pro¬tection against attack. The blood coagulates quickly on exposureto water, thus minimizing blood loss that could both debilitatethe hippocampus and attract sharks (sharks have only a 20%chance of going into a feeding frenzy if the only bleeding creatureis a hippocampus).HabitatSociety: Hippocampi are the prized steeds of the sea.They can be found in deep waters anywhere, in freshwater lakesand oceans. They are able to breathe fresh and salt water w-ithequal ease. They can also breathe air but require frequent gulpsof water to keep from drying out. They are unable to move out ofwater.Despite their radically different environments* horses and hip¬pocampi are very simitar. They have approximately the samesizes, life spans* and personalities, although hippocampi areblessed w T ith much higher intelligence.Hippocampi are herbivores. They normally graze on seaweedand other soft vegetation. If their usual fodder is unavailable,their strong teeth can chew up mollusks and coral.Wild hippocampi roam in herds of 2d4. These are usually astallion, Ld4 mares, and the rest young hippocampi of either sex.Hippocampus mares lay a single, large egg. After six months, theegg hatches a single foal. Twins are extremely rare (1% chance)*The foals grow quickly in two years. The yearlings a re physicallythe equals of the adults. Hippocampian tales speak of a "GreatHerd' 1 of hundreds or thousands of hippocampi that roams theuncharted reaches of the tar seas. No non-hippocampi have everseen this spectacle.Hippocampi may be "domesticated" by water-breathing hu¬manoids, especially tritons. In truth, the intelligent hippocampicooperate with the humanoids. The hippocampi provide theirservices as steeds and allies while the humanoids provide protec¬tion. The benevolent hippocampi may assist surface dwellerswho are visiting the aquatic world, whether voluntarily or byaccident- Many a shipwrecked sailor has been saved fromdrowning by a passing hippocampus. Hippocampi are goodjudges of character: they will not assist an evil being or anyonewho acts in a hostile manner toward them. Sometimes a hippo-campuss offer of a ride can be more trouble than it is worth.Young hippocampi often forget that most surface dwellersbreathe air, not water.Hippocampi do not accumulate treasure. Most spurn even or¬namental gifts such as collars or leg bands. They simply have nouse for these gewgaws. They do appreciate delicacies, however,in the forms of tasty foods not available in the water.Ecology: Hippocampi are one of the most successful of the in¬telligent, good-aligned marine monsters. They maintain ties withmermen and sea elves, as well as surface dwellers who make theirliving in the water, They provide valuable services as steeds*guides, and allies. Hippocampus eggs sell for 1*500 gp. Younghippocampi are worth 2.500 gp. However, surface dwellers whohave been saved by hippocampi remain so grateful to their form¬er rescuers that they may attack any merchant selling eggs orfoals in a public market and attempt to return the hippocampi tothe sea,
Hippogriffs are flying monsters that have an equal likelihood tobe predator, prey, or steed.The hippogriff is a monstrous hybrid of eagle and equine fea¬tures. It has the ears, neck, mane, torso, and hind legs of a horse.The wings, forelegs, and face are those of an eagle. It is about thesize of a light riding horse. A hippogriff may be colored russetgolden tan, or a variety of browns. The feathers are usually adifferent shade than the hide. The beak is ivory or golden yellow.Combat: The hippogriff attacks with its eagle-like claws andbeak. Each claw can tear for ld6 points of damage, while thescissor-like beak inflicts IdlO points of damage.Habitat/Society: Hippogriffs prefer the desolate sections of thetemperate and tropic regions, especially rolling hills that enablethem to get quickly airborne.Hippogriffs are territorial. They have a preferred grazing andhunting area that covers ld4 x 10 square miles. Somewhere inthis territory is a naturally protected site that serves as the hippo-griff nest. Here is where the young hippogriffs stay. The nest isalways guarded.The typical hippogriff herd includes 1-3 adult males, an equalnumber of mares, and the rest are immature young. There is a25% chance that one or more of the mares is pregnant. Gestationtakes 10 months. During the first five months, this occurs withinthe mare. Then she lays an egg that hatches in another fivemonths. Twin births are rare (1% chance)*The foal is able to walk upon hatching. Its beak remains softfor the first two weeks; this enables the foal to nurse. Then itsbeak hardens and the hippogriff switches to regurgitated foodfrom its mother, The colts learn to eat solid meat at four months,although they are clumsy killers (-4 penalty to attack rolls anddamage). At six months they can fly f] 8, class D) and fight with a-2 penalty to attack rolls and damage. Yearlings are identical toadults, although they are unable to breed until they are threeyears old.Wild hippogriffs are omnivorous. They feed on whatever isavailable, whether greenery, fruits, or wildlife. Hippogriffs areable to attack fairly large prey, such as bison, but they do notprey on carnivores. The exception is humanoids. Hippogriffsmay in the absence of other meat, attack small groups of people.Bodies are then carried back to the nest to feed the others; this iswhere the victim's possessions usually spill out. Hippogriffs areclean monsters; they dispose of carcasses and other debris by car¬rying them downhill . They like dear, sparkly things like glass,crystals, and precious gems. Males may amass a small trove keptcovered by brush. As a mating ritual, he arranges these in a dis¬play to entice mares.Ecology; Hippogriffs are closely related to griffons, lust as grif¬fons are the result of crossing an eagle with a lion, hippogriffsresulted from the crossing of an eagle with a horse* Hippogriffsmay have been created as a natural prey for the griffons, Fortu¬nately for the hippogriff, its own formidable weapons give it afighting chance. To make up for the griffon’s superiority, hippo¬griffs gather in larger groups.Hippogriffs are also related to pegasi. Because the hippogriffseat meal, pegasi avoid their company.Hippogriffs make excellent flying mounts. The maneuverabil¬ity decreases to Class D, but their speed is unimpaired. They areless likely to eat the rider than a griffon is.If a hippogriff is captured while still very young (under fourmonths), it can be domesticated and trained to serve as a steed.Hippogriff eggs sell for 1,000 gp, young hippogriffs for 2,000-3,000 gp, It will probably have to be taught to fly. Domestic hip¬pogriffs are also taught to recognize a limited number of speciesas food; humanoids of course are not on that list. Hippogriffshave difficulty breeding in captivity. Like flying, the wild hippo¬griff has to be captured before such skills are learned. Maturehippogriffs may be persuaded to voluntarily assist riders who canprovide them with ample food or protection.
Hobgoblins are a fierce humanoid race that wage a perpetual warwith the other humanoid races. They are intelligent, organized,and aggressive.The typical hobgoblin is a burly humanoid standing 6 J /z* tall.Their hairy hide*; range from dark reddish-brown to dark grayTheir faces show dark red or red-orange skin. Large males haveblue or red noses. Hobgoblin eyes are either yellowish or darkbrown while their teeth are yellow. Their garments tend to bebrightly colored, often bold, blood red* Any leather is alwaystinted black. Hobgoblin weaponry is kept polished and repaired.Hobgoblins have their own language and often speak withores, goblins, and carnivorous apes. Roughly 20% of them canspeak the common tongue of man.Combat: Hobgoblins in a typical force will be equipped with po-learms (30%), momingstars (20%). swords and bows (20%),spears (10%), swords and spears (10%), swords and morningstars (5%), or swords and v/hips (5%),Hobgoblins fight equally well in bright light or virtual dark¬ness, having infra vision with a range of 60 feet,Hobgoblins hate elves and always attack them first.Habitat Society: Hobgoblins are nightmarish mockeries of thehumanoid races who have a military society organized in tribalbands. Each tribe is intensely jealous of its status. Chance meet¬ings with other tribes will result in verbal abuse 185%) or openfighting (15%), Hobgoblin tribes are found in almost any climateor subterranean realm.A typical tribe of hobgoblins will have between 20 and 200(2dl0 x 10) adult male warriors. In addition, for every 20 malehobgoblins there will be a leader (known as a sergeant) and twoassistants. These have 9 hit points each but still fight as 1 + l HitDie monsters. Groups numbering over 100 are led by a sub-chiefwho has lo hit points and an Armor Class of 3. The greatstrength of a sub-chief gives it a ^2 on its damage rolls and al¬lows it to fight as a 3 Hit Die monster. If the hobgoblins are en¬countered in their lair, they will be led by a chief with AC 2. 22hit points, and + 3 points of damage per attack, who fights as a 4Hit Die monster, The chief has 5-20 (5d4) sub-chiefs acting asbodyguards. Leaders and chiefs always carry two weapons.Each tribe has a distinctive battle standard which is carried in¬to combat to inspire the troops. If the tribal chief is leading thebattle, he will carry the standard with him, otherwise it will beheld by one of his sub-chiefs.In addition to the warriors present in a hobgoblin tribe, therewill be half again that many females and three times as manychildren as adult males.Fully 80% of all known hobgoblin lairs are subterranean com¬plexes. The remaining 20% are surface villages which are forti¬fied with a ditch, fence, 2 gates, and 3-6 guard towers. Villagesare often built upon ruined humanoid settlements and may incor¬porate defensive features already present in the ruins.Hobgoblin villages possess artillery in the form of 2 heavy cat¬apults, 2 light catapults, and a ballista for each 50 warriors. Un¬derground complexes may be guarded by 2-12 carnivorous apes(60%),They are highly adept at mining and can detect new construc¬tion, sloping passages, and shifting walls 40% of the time.Ecology: Hobgoblins fed superior to goblins or ores and may actas leaders for them. In such cases, the 'lesser races" are used asbattle fodder Hobgoblin mercenaries may work for powerful orrich evil humanoids.This marine species of hobgoblin is similar to the land dwellingvariety in many respects, Koalinth dwell in shallow fresh or saltwater and make their homes in caves.Their bodies have adapted to marine environments via theevolution of gills. Their webbed fingers and toes give them amovement rate of 12 when swimming. Their bodies are sleekerthan those of hobgoblins and they have light green skin. Theyspeak an unusual dialect of the hobgoblin tongue.They tend to employ thrusting weapons like spears and polearms, Koalinth are every bit as disagreeable as hobgoblins, prey-ing on every thing they come across, especially aquatic human¬oid and demi-human races. They detest aquatic elves.
Homonculi are small mystical beings created by magicians forspying and other special tasks.The average homonculous is vaguely humanoid in form. It is18 inches tall and its greenish, reptilian skin may have spots orwarts. They have leathery, bat-like wings with a span of 24 inch¬es and a mouth filled with long, pointed teeth that can inject apotent sleeping venom.Combat: The homonculous is a quick and agile Oyer which usesthis ability to great advantage in combat. It can dart to and fro soquickly that any attempt to capture it short of a net or web spellis almost impossible.In combat, the homonculous will land on its chosen victim andbite with its needle-like fangs. In addition to doing 1-3 points ofdamage, the creature injects a powerful venom. Anyone bittenby the horn on ado us must save vs. poison or fall into a comatosesleep for 5-30 {5d6* minutes.The creature s saving throws are the same as those of its crea¬tor. While most attacks against either the homonculous or crea¬tor do not affect the other, there is one exception. Any attackwhich destroys the homonculous causes its creator to suffer 2-20(2dl0) points of damage. Conversely if the creator is slain, thehomonculous also dies and its body swiftly melts away into apool of ichor.contact with its master, though it can be removed from that re¬gion by fora. As soon as it loses contact with its master, the crea¬ture panics and will do anything to regain contact. Contactbetween the two cannot be maintained across planar or dimen¬sional barriers. tf either the creator or homonculous is on anotherplane, the homonculous will remain near the point where it waslast in contact with its master.Homonculi are a reflection of their creator. They have the cre¬ators alignmentj basic intelligence, and even physical manner¬isms. They are mute but can write if the creator is literate. Theymay assist their creator in a variety of tasks including magicalendeavors, although they cannot themselves cast spells.Homonculi lairs are in the homes of their creators. Indulgentwizards may provide a specially built bed, nest, or living cham¬ber. Otherwise, the homonculous simply perches wherever itcan.Habitat/Sodety; Homonculi are artificial creatures created bywizards as living tools. The process by which one is created islong, complicated, and expensive. Any wizard who desires a ho-monculous servant must first locate and hire an alchemist. Thewizard must provide one pint of his own blood and 500-2,000{ Ld4 x 500) gold pieces. The blood becomes the basis for the crea¬ture's body while the money pays for a variety of other suppliesand the alchemist s time. The alchemist requires 1-4 weeks totransform the blood into the necessary magical base. The wizardis then sent for and required to cast mending, mirror image, andwizard eye spells upon the fluids. As the last of these spells isworked, the fluids spontaneously coagulate and form the body ofthe homonculous.The homonculous is tdepathically linked to its creator. Itknows everything that its master knows and transmits every¬thing it sees and hears to him. The creator can telepathically con¬trol the actions of the homonculous at a range of up to 480 yards.The homonculous will never willingly travel beyond the limits ofEcology: Homonculi are nothing more than tools. They haveno place in the natural world and are not part of any ecologicalsystem. They provide the wizard who created them with a varie¬ty of useful services, Commonly, a homonculous is called uponto act as a spy, scout, messenger, or emissary. Because of the po¬tential harm which the death of a homonculous inflicts on itsmaster they are seldom employed as body guards or livingweapons.Although they are magical creations, homonculi possess thesame biological functions as non-magical creatures. They mustrest and require food and drink in order to survive. When eating,they share the tastes of their masters and generally consumeabout as much as a typical cat.There are rumors of magical means by which non-wizards canacquire their own form of homonculous. Although these are notwidely believed to be valid, there are those who report havingseen the process or its results first hand. If such a procedure ex¬ists, it would be quite valuable to its discoverer.
The hook horror is a bipedal underground-dwelling monsterthat looks like a cross between a vulture and a man with hooksinstead of hands.The hook horror stands about nine feet tall and weighs almost350 pounds. It has a tough, mottled grey exoskeleton, like that ofan insect. Its front limbs end in 124nch-iong hooks. Its legs end infeet that have three small hooks, like long, sharp toes. Its head isshaped like that of a vulture, including the hooked beak. Its eyesare multifaceted. It is thought that the hook horror is distantlyrelated to the cockroach or cave cricket.Hook horrors do not have a smell to humans and demi-humans, but an animal would detect a dry musty odor. Theycommunicate in a series of clicks and clacks made by the exoskel¬eton at their throats* In a cave, this eerie sound can echo a longway. They can use this to estimate cavern sizes and distances,much like the sonic radar of a bat.Combat: Hook horrors have acute hearing and are surprisedonly on a roll of 1, They always know their territory, and theytry to ambush unsuspecting travelers or denizens. Each roundthey swing with both hooks. If in any round both hit, during thatround their beaks hit automatically. They automatically inflict2d6 points of damage each round with the beak until at least oneof the hooks is dislodged.The eyesight of the hook horrors is very poor. They are blind¬ed in normal light. They use their extremely acute hearing totrack and locate prey. Since their eyesight is so poor anyway,they suffer no combat or movement penalties if blinded or incomplete darkness. They attack silenced opponents with the pen¬alties others suffer when attacking blind.Hook horrors are natural climbers, as their hooks give themexcellent purchase on rock surfaces. They can move at normalspeed up vertical surfaces that are not sheer. Their great weightmeans that they cannot hang from the ceiling like other insects.Habitat Society: The obvious penalty for having hooks insteadof hands is that hook horrors cannot use weapons or tools* Theycan only pick up items in their beaks. This severely restricts theirability to amass large treasures*A dan of hook horrors most often lives in caves and under¬ground warrens. The entrance is usually up a vertical or steeplysloped rock wall. Each family unit in the clan has its own smallcavern off a central cave area. The dans eggs are kept in thesafest, most defensible place. The clan is ruled by the eldest fe¬male, who never participates in combat. The eldest male, fre¬quently the mate of the dan ruler, takes charge of all hunting orother combat situations and is considered the war chieftain.Members of a clan rarely fight each other. They may quarrel ornot cooperate, but they rarely come to blows. Clans sometimesfight each other, but only when there is a bone of contention,such as territorial disputes. It is rare for a dan of hook horrors towant to rule large areas or to conquer other clans.Hook horrors have poor relationships with other races. Al¬though they do not foolishly attack strong parties, generally oth¬er creatures are considered to be meat. They retreat when facedwith a stronger group. Hook horrors do not recognize indebted¬ness or gratitude. Their simple language does not even have aterm for these concepts, just because a player character saves thelife of a hook horror does not mean that it will feel grateful andreturn the favor.Ecology: Although hook horrors are basically omnivores, theyprefer meat. They can eat just about any cave-dwelling fungus,plants, lichens, or animals. Hook horrors are well acclimated tocave life. They have few natural predators, although anythingthat managed to catch one would try to eat it*The hook horror's exoskeleton dries and becomes too brittlefor use afEer a month or so.Horses are large quadrupeds often used for transportation, or aspack and draft animals, by human and demihuman races. Theyare frequently bred for their speed and for their beauty,A horse can be solid white, gray chestnut, brown, black, orvarious reddish tones; Its hide can instead show a variation orcombination of these colors. Some of the more interesting varia¬tions include the piebald- which has a coat of large, irregularpatches of black and white; the palomino, with its rich yellow-gold coat and white mane and tail; and Lhe dapple gray which isdark gray with flecks of lighter color on the chest, belly andhindquarters.In addition to the coat's color, the horse may have markings ofvarious sorts. The long hairs of the mane and tail can be lighter,darker, or of the same color as the body of the horse. Possiblemarkings include socks (meaning the leg from the hoof, halfwayto the knee, or hock, is white); a white muzzle; a blaze (a wideband of white from the top of the horse's head to the tip of itsnose): and a star fa white, diamond-shaped patch set on thehorse's forehead, right between its eyes).Horses are measured in "hands." One hand equals 4 inches.Combat: War horses will fight independently of the rider on thesecond and succeeding rounds of a melee. Other breeds fight onlyif cornered. Most attack twice per round by kicking with theirfront hooves.Unless specially trained, horses can be panicked by loud nois¬es, strange smells, fire, or sudden movements 90% of the time.Horses trained and accustomed to such things (usually war-horses) panic only 10% of the time,Habitat/Society: The horse's gestation period is about 11 months,Mares (female horses) usually give birth to a single foal (younghorse). Twins do occur, but only about 10% of the time (or less).Even triplets are possible, but are extremely rare. The foal isweaned after six months. It is mature after two to three years,and is considered adult at age five. The usual life span of a horseis 30-35 years, though rare exceptions have lived to age 50, andhard-worked horses rarely live past age 12.Only 10% of ponies and wild horses can be trained to serve aswarhorses. Of all the breeds and varieties listed here, only mulesare agile enough for use in mountainous or subterranean envi¬ronments.Ecology: Modem horses evolved in temperate plains and grass¬lands. Domestic breeds can be found anywhere people live (evenIn the high mountains, if the local roads are good).Horses can carry great weights for long periods of time, butnot without tiring. The table below shows the maximum weight ahorse can carry; as illustrated, greater weights cause the horse tomove at slower movement rates.A horse can also move at speeds higher than those given as theirbase movement rates, as shown on the table below. The horse'snormal movement rate is considered a trot.As noted in Chapter 14 of the Players Handbook , in a day oftravel over good terrain, a creature can travel a number of milesequal to twice its normal movement rate. A horse's overlandmovemenL rate can be improved by pushing it to a canter or gal¬lop. A canter can be safely maintained for two hours, or a gallopfor one hour, but the horse must be walked for an hour before itsspeed can again be increased. For the effects of increasing ahorses speed enough to affect its overland movement rate, seeChapter 14 of the DMG,A horse will not gallop when loaded with enough material toreduce its normal movement rate by half: nor will it canter orgallop it carrying a load which will reduce its normal movementrate to one-third normal (see Horse Table 1).Draft horses are large animals bred to haul very heavy loads, andare usually trained to be part of a dray team. Muscular but slow',these ponderous animals haul freight over long distances withoutcomplaint, and are frequently used by traders.Warhorses are bred and trained to the lance, the spear, and thesword. They have higher morale than other horses, and are notas skittish about sudden movements and loud noises. The choiceof knights and cavalry, these are the pinnacle of military horses.There are three varieties; heavy, medium and light.Heavy warhorses are similar to draft animals. Large and mus¬cular. they are relatively slow. Their size and powerful legs allowthem to be armored in plate, and to carry a warrior in plate, aseasily as a pony carries saddle bags. A good heavy war horse,fully trained, costs 400 or more gold pieces.Medium war horses are lighter and smaller than their heavycousins They can be encumbered with leather or light plate ar¬mor and carry a rider wearing leather or light plate. The advan¬tage of the medium war horse is its increased speed. The price ofa medium war horse is 200 gp or more.Light war horses are the fastest of the breed. They can carrywarriors in leather armor, but are rarely armored themselves,They make excellent mounts ior raiding parties, light cavalry,and thieves. Light war horses cost 150 gp or more.Small horses used primarily for transportation and occasionallyfarm work, ponies are a lively breed. They are more excitablethan the larger horses, but frequently more gentle, as well Theyare sometimes trained and used a$ war horses by several of thesmaller demihuman races. Prices vary depending on training andsize, but most cost around 500 gp.Wild horses can be captured and trained to serve as mounts orwork ponies. Training usually takes twice as long as training adomestic horse. Wild horses are hardy but jittery and difficult tocatch in the wild. They are sometimes hunted for food by humanand demihuman tribes.Riding horses are bred to the saddle. Perhaps the most commonof all horses, they are ridden, worked, and raced by humans anddemihumam alike. The price of a riding horse wiU vary, depend¬ing on its bloodlines, training, and appearance. Fast and agile,this breed is a good choice for personal transportation and gen¬eral use.Sterile hybrids of horses and donkeys, mules are very sure-footedand exceptionally stubborn. They can be ridden by patient han¬dlers who know how to control them, but are best used as packanimals in difficult or mountainous terrain. They are sometimesused by adventurers, for they are the only breed that can be tak¬en into subterranean regions. The price of mules depends on howmuch grief they have given their current owners.A steppe pony is not attractive, graceful or large, but its homely,ungainly appearance disguises an animal of great endurance,speed, and strength, A steppe pony looks like a cross between ahorse and a pony, but is a breed unto itself. They are small, aver¬aging 13 hands (4 f 4' f ) at the withers, and they have short necks,large heads, and heavily boned bodies. Their winter coal is shag¬gy and gives them the appearance of being half-wild. They aremost commonly colored copper or bronze, with a light yellowstripe running down their backs.These horses are tough, hard to kill, and aggressive in batUe,They have most of the same characteristics as a light war horse,with a few exceptions. It attacks three times per round, its thirdattack being a bite which causes 1-3 points of damage. The steppepony's thick, shaggy coat and tough hide gives it an AC of 6. Itsshort legs are powerful and can carry horse and rider swiftly,,over long distances; its small back is also very strong and it cancarry as much as a medium war horse 1220/330/440). The steppepony is even-tempered and steady in battle; its morale is average16-10), and it panics very rarely (5% chance) due to such thingsas fire and loud noises.The steppe pony has remarkable endurance. It can survive bygrazing alone and does not require feeding and handling by itsrider, so separate supplies of grain are not needed. It can be rid¬den for long distances without tiring or faltering. A +3 modifieris applied to the pony's saving throw's for lameness and exhaus¬tion checks w hen travelling overland.In spite of all its qualities, the steppe pony is not sought after orconsidered valuable, ll is most commonly ridden by nomadictribes. Outside the steppes, the animal is almost completely un¬known and does not command high prices at auction. Onlybreeders who know the steppe pony's qualities, and who seekstrength and stamina in their own horses bloodlines, are likely toconsider the steppe pony as valuable.
These primitive humans are found m otherwise uninhabited regions.For every 10 aborigines there will he a 3rd-level fighter. Aboriginaltribes are always led by a chief (a 5th-level fighter) and 1-4 subehiefs(4th-level fighters). For every 10 aborigines encountered there is a10% chance that they have a shaman (3rd* level priest) with them.Most encounters (60%) will be with predominantly male war orhunting/gathering parties. There is a 40% chance that an encounterwill be in or near their lair. Aborigines make their lairs in naturalshelters such as caves or forest groves. The number encounteredabove is for males; there will usually be an equal number of femalesand children in the lair.Aborigines are typically armed with stone axes, spears, and dubs.These are NFC counterparts of the PCs band, groups of fighters, thieves,priests, and wizards who band together in search of fame, fortune, andpower. Typical adventuring bands consist of between two to eight mem¬bers. Solitary adventurers may be separated from their group, lost,advanced scouts, or sole survivors of decimated groups.After determining the base stee of the group encountered, deter¬mine which class each belongs to;
Determine the lovd of the party of adventurers; low, medium, high,or very high, and roll for each member on the table below.A high level adventurer will have attracted followers who will ac¬company the party —1-100% of them* This can swell an encounteredband's size to that of a small army.Clerics and wizards will have 1-100% of their full spells at the timethe encounter occurs (round down).Higher level fighters and clerics will usually have plate mail andshields, and ride unbarded medium warhorses. Each level an adven¬turer has attained gives a cumulative 5% chance for magical items asshown below. Roll tor each item marked "Yr Reroll tf a cursed orotherwise undesirable item occurs, but only one reroll is allowed foreach category. If no usable item is indicated, the adventurer has noitem in that category'.'If there is no usable miscellaneous weapon, roll again for possibilityof a wand staff/rod If one is indicated but is unusable by a priest,there is no such item present,In addition, such adventurers have ordinary treasure. Fightershave type L and M; clerics J, K, and M; wizards L, N. and Q; andthieves J P N. and Q.Bandits are rural thieves who openly prey on travelers and isolateddwellings. They travel in groups of 20-200, usually led by high levelfighters, rogues, wizards, and priests. For every 20 bandits encoun¬tered, there will be an additional 3rd-level fighter. If 100+ are en¬countered, the leader will be at least 8th level. Bandits are typicallyarmed with swords, spears, and small shields. Up to 20% may bearmed with bows. Bandits may wear no armor (50%), leather (35%),padded (10%), or ring mail (5%). Brigands are better equipped andwill have higher morale.Barbarians belong to primitive cultures that possess rudimentaryskills such as animal husbandry and simple manufacturing (weaving,carving). They may live in villages of simple buildings or in portablestructures like tents, tepees, yurts, or wagons. In aquatic regions,they may live on watercraft like canoes or rafts.Barbarians are typically armed with swords, knives, bows, spears,and dubs, Armor is limited to shields, helmets, and chestplates. Theytend to be hostile toward unfamiliar wizards. Barbarians are adept atsurprising opponents; such opponents have a -5 penalty on theirsurprise rolls.Berserkers are violent war parties prone to manic behavior in battle.When encountered, berserkers drive themselves into a battle frenzythat raises their fighting skills and morale, Berserkers attack twice perround, or once at+2. Many use leather armor and shields, givingthem Armor Class 7, Berserkers need never make morale checks.Dervishes are highly religious nomads. Due to their fanatical na¬ture, dervishes add 1 to their attack rolls and damage dice. They nev¬er check morale in combat.If encountered during a peaceful period, berserkers may be indis¬tinguishable from normal warrior bands; dervishes may be mistakenfor armed pilgrims.These are simple people involved in the production of agriculturalgoods. About 65% of all encounters will be with larmers tilling theirland. Encounters with herders may occur anywhere there is grazingland or a market for their herds. Encounters with herders also in¬volve the herd animals, whatever they are.These are the upper classes. They are not the ruling nobility but theirwealth and connections make them nearly as powerful. Each memberof the gentry encountered may be accompanied by 0-3 guards (d4-l)and 1-6 servants. The guards are mercenary fighters of 1st to 6th leveland armed with sword and spear. The servants might fight as 0-levdfighters, but are more likely to panic. The gentry themselves might bearmed with daggers and short swords.Knights are armored, mounted fighters directly serving their lord.They may be on a quest, a specific mission, or simply patrolling theirlord's realm. Knights may be accompanied by their squires, hirelings,and other followers (50%). Knights are armed with sword, lance,mace or flad, and dagger. Armor includes a shield and either plate orchain mail. A knight rides a medium or heavy warhorse, usually abarded mount.About 5% of encounters will be with a vanquished knight. Beingstripped of arms and armor, the knight may be mistaken for any non-warrior class. The knight may even support this deception, at leastuntil weaponry becomes available.See Adventurer to determine level and special possessions.
These are groups i>t low level fighters who hire themselves to thehighest bidder. When encountered, there is an even chance they maybe already hired and on their way to a war, meeting with a prospertive employer open for employment, or on their way home and notwilling to take on a new task just yet.See Adventurer to determine level and special possessions.Men of the sea are usually found on or near open waters. If encoun¬tered inland, sailors may be ferrymen on streams or rivers. Fishermenwill either be putting out to a fishing site, fishing, or returning withtheir catches. Sailors may be armed with knives, short swords, cut¬lasses. or belaying pirn (I point of damage).Merchants and traders deal in goods and services. Those encounteredin the wild are traveling in caravans in search of new business. Only10% of the number encountered are actually merchants. 10% aredrovers and the rest are mercenary guards. The guards are led by afighter (6th-i 1th level] and a lieutenant one level lower. Each leader Isaccompanied by 12 guards of 2nd level . For each 50 people in thecaravan there is a 10% chance of a wizard (6th-Sth level! and a 5%chance of a priest (5th-7lh level), as well as a 15% chance of a thief(fith-lflth leveli accompanied by 1-4 thieves (3rd-7th level). All suchleaders, guards, and special characters are in addition to the numberof merchants, drovers, and normal guards.The treasure is mostly in trade goods (90%). The caravan has 10pack animals or one wagon per 5,000 gp value.These are travelers journeying on personal business. They are foundprimarily in civilized regions, although pioneers may be encounteredin relatively peaceful frontier regions. Middle class travelers may bearmed with knives, daggers, and short swords.Peasants are farmers, herders, and simple tradesmen of low socialSerfs are totally subject to the local lord: they are the lowest of thesocial classes. They farm and perform the brute labor functions onlarge agricultural holdings. Serfs, really, are little more than slaves.Both peasants and serfs may be armed with daggers, dubs, quar-terstaves, and farming took. They never have any treasure exceptunder the rarest of occasions when they are able to hoard scavengedgoods.Pilgrims are groups of the devout on their way to or from a holyplace. They can be found anywhereA group of pilgrims will always be accompanied by priests andother character classes. These people may be acting as leaders,guards, or pilgrims. Groups of pilgrims always include one to six2nd-Ievel priests, one to four 4th4evel priests, one or two 6th4eveland one Sth-level priest (accompanied by one 3rd- and one Sth-kvelassistant). For every 10 pilgrims, there is a 10% chance of one to eightfighters (IsMfth level) and 1-6 thieves (2nd-7th level). There is a 5%chance per 10 pilgrims of a wizard of 6th-9th level. If the pilgrims arelawful good, the fighters will be paladins; if the pilgrims are chaoticgood, the fighters wilt be rangers, 1( the party is neutral, the priestswill be druids. If the pilgrims are lawful evil, they all fight as ber¬serkers, although armed only with daggers.About 75% of pilgrim bands encountered are on foot. There is a 5%chance that a high level priest will be carrying a religious artifact,carefully hidden and protected by traps and magic.
These are seafaring thieves and fighters. Pirates are always led by acaptain of 8th or 10th level—8th if fewer than 200, The captain willhave a 6th- or 7th-levcl lieutenant and four mates of 4th level. Forevery 50 pirates encountered, there will be a 3rd-level fighter as wellas a 15% chance for a cleric of 12th-I5ih level and a i0% chance for awizard of 6th-9th level. For every 100 pirates, there will be a 5th-levelfighter. All of these are in addition to the pirates already indicated bythe dice.Pirates wear leather armor; leaders wear chain mail. All are armedwith knives, swords, and polearms. Some will be armed with cross¬bows, either light (20%) or heavy (10%). In addition their ships maybe equipped with ballistae or catapults.Buccaneers are similar, but are neutral with evil tendencies.These are the duly appointed representatives of the local govern¬ment, concerned with upholding the laws, maintaining the peaceand carrying out their superior s will. If constables are encountered inthe wilderness, they might be pursuing a fugitive (50%} or investigat¬ing a case on the outskirts of their jurisdiction (50%). Constables arethe equivalent of fighters of Ist-4th level. Wilderness encounters in¬clude a 25% chance that the constables are accompanied by a mob.The mob is composed of citizenry temporarily deputized to assist thepolice; they fight as 0-level fighters.These are typical NPC priests traveling on personal business or on amission. The number encountered refers to the number of actualpriests. It they are of high enough level they might also have foblowers accompanying them (50%).See Adventurers” to determine level and special possessions*Nonmerchant sailors are the seagoing armed forces of the local gov¬ernment. acting as police or soldiers. They may be patrolling theirhome waters, pursuing a waterborne criminal, or on their way to orfrom a mission in other waters. Each ship is commanded by a captain(6thdevel fighter) and a brst officer (5th-level fighter). Sailors arearmed with swords knives, bows, and polearms. They may also bearmed with heavier weapons such as catapults and ballistae.Slavers are usually found in control of a band of captive slaves; if noslaves are present, the slavers may be mistaken for mercenaries orbrigands. The slavers leader might be a thief, fighter, or fighter/thief(6th-11th level), assisted by a lieutenant one level lower, Each leaderis accompanied by 1-12 guards of 1st or 2nd level. For each 50 slavesand slavers, there is a 10% chance of a wizard (bthTJth level) and a5% chance of a priest (5th-7th level); these work for the slavers.There are ID slaves present for each 1-10 slavers. Slaves are treatedthe same as serfs. They may be recently acquired captives being tak¬en from their homelands or long-time slaves being moved to a newmarket. Such slaves will be on fool and linked together in strings of10-100 by ropes or chains. They will be willing to help any adventur¬ers who try to rescue them, although they will be limited in the helpthey can provide. Slaves may be any class or type, but only 1% ofcaptives belong to one of the character classes.These are organized militia engaged in the defense of their home re¬gion. Soldiers are led by a captain (6th level or higher) and a lieuten¬ant (1-4 levels lower). Each leader is accompanied by 1-12 soldiers ol1st or 2nd level, Most soldiers are engaged in routine patrols of thehomeland, U local wars are occurring, there is a 50% chance that thesoldiers are either heading off to the war or returning from it. There isa 5% chance of a cleric (5th-7th level) for each 50 soldiers present.See Adventurers" to determine level and special possessions.These are low level rogues who, if not already engaged in a crime,may attempt to rob wealthy or weak-looking adventurers, Thievesmay be armed with concealed weapons such as knives, darts, black¬jacks, and short swords.See "Adventurers'' to determine level and special possessionsTradesfo lk/Craftspe o piePeople engaged in the trades and crafts will be about their businesswhen encountered. They may be operating a shop, acquiring materi¬als for their business, or traveling to or from a client's location. Theyare willing to do business with adventurers, provided they are prop¬erly paid. They will not attack except to defend themselves. Notethat 1 % of all tradesfolk may be retired adventurers. Tradesmen maybe armed with knives, quarterstaves, and tools.About 90% of their treasure is merchandise or equipment.Tribal societies are the heart of primitive cultures; people hunt, fish,and farm near their simple villages. They are found in any climate.For each 10 tribespeople, there will bean additional 3rd-Ievel fight¬er, Tribes are led by a chief (a 5th-level fighter) and 1-4 subchiefs (4th-level fighters). For every 10 encountered, there is a 4thdevel priestwith them, and for each 30 tribespeople encountered, a 6th-leve|priest. The tribe has a shaman (Sth-tevd. priest). Tribal priests tend tobe druidical in nature.Tribal villages are made of local materials (grass, bamboo, mud.ice). In addition to the males encountered, there will also be an equalnumber of women and a 75% chance of 20-50 slaves.Tribesmens weapons are typically dubs, knives, spears, andbows. Armor is limited to shields.These are typical NPC wizards. They may be engaged in personalbusiness, gathering materials, or traveling. The number encounteredFefers to the number of actual wizards. They may be accompanied by0-3 (ld4-l) servants and guards for each wizard. Guards are fighters1-4 levels lower than the wizard they protect.See ' Adventurers ' to determine level and special possessions.
Combat: Hydrae always have 8 points on each of their Hit Dice andall heads must be severed before the hydra dies. A hydra can bring upto four heads into action against a single foe* biting once with each ofthem.Each time a hydra takes 8 points of damage, one of its heads isassumed to have been severed. When this happens, a natural reflexseals the neck arteries shut to prevent blood loss.Hydrae attack according to the number of heads they have. There¬fore, a 10-headed hydra continues to attack as a 10 HD monster evenafter several heads have been slain.Attacks on the body have no effect unless a single attack inflictsdamage equal to the hydra's original hit points.Habitat Society: Hydrae are solitary creatures who prefer dismal sur¬roundings. They gather only to mate.Ecology: Despite the hydras size and multiple attacks, they are oftenpreyed upon by dragons. They are impossible to train.Although similar to a normal hydra Lemaean hydrae will regeneratetwo heads for each one that is severed. A maximum of 12 heads can begrown. New heads form in 1-4 rounds and can be avoided only by theprompt application of flame to the neck following the attack which de¬stroyed the first head. This hydra's body is immune to all attacks.These reddish hydra have 7 or 8 heads which are able to breathe a jetof fire (5' wide and T long) twice per day. This attack does 8 points ofdamage, halved if a save vs. breath weapon is made.Hydrae are immense reptilian monsters with multiple heads. For eachHit Die the hydra has, it will have one head. The chart above lists theTHAC0 value for hydrae, the number of heads and the damage thatthey inflict each time they bite.Hydrae are gray-brown to dark brown, with light yellow or tanunderbellies. Their eyes are amber and their teeth are yellow-white.Hydrae have between 5 and 12 heads < ld8 +4).Each head of this purplish-brown hydra is able to breathe a stream offrost 10 feet wide and 20 feet long which does 8 points of damage. Asave vs. breath weapon is allowed for half damage.
Imps arc diminutive creatures of an evil nature who roam theworld and act as familiars for lawful evil wizards and priests,The average imp is a 2’ humanoid with leathery, bat-likewings, a barbed tail and sharp, twisted horns. Its skin is a darkred and its horns and jagged teeth are a gleaming white.The imp can polymath itseli into two other animal forms.The most commonly encountered alternate forms are those of alarge spider, raven, giant rat, or goat. In such forms the imp isphysically identical to a normal animal.Combat: In its natural form, the imp attacks with the wickedstinger on its tail. In addition to inflicting 1-4 points of damage,this stinger injects a powerful poison which is so deadly thatthose who fail their save versus poison are instantly slain by it.When it is poly morphed, the imp attacks with the natural weap¬onry of its adopted form, though the goat and raven forms lackdamaging attacks.The imp can use its special magical abilities no matter what itsform. All imps are able to delect good, detect magic, or becomemotsibie at will. Once per day they can use a suggestion.Imps are immune to attacks based on cold, fire, or electricityand resist all other spell attacks as if they were 7 Hit Die crea¬tures, They can be harmed only by silver or magical weaponsand are able to regenerate one hit point per melee round.Habitat Society: imps are beings of a very evil nature who orig¬inate on the darkest of evil planes. Their main purpose on thePrime Material plane is to spread evil by assisting lawful evil wiz¬ards and priests. When such a person is judged worthy of animp's service, the imp comes in answer to a find /umi/iar spell.Once they have contacted their new "master', imps begin atonce to take control of his actions. Although imps maintain theillusion that the summoner is in charge, the actual relationship iscloser to that of a workman (the imp) and his tools (the master).Although an imp s body can be destroyed on the Prime Materi¬al plane, it is not so easily slain. When its physical form is lost, itscorrupt spirit instantly returns to its home plane where it is re¬formed and, after a time, returned to our world to resume itswork.While they are technically in the service of their master, imps re¬tain a basic independence and ambition to become more powerfulsomeday. They may acquire treasure from those they slay, and willoften pilfer valuables encountered during their travels.The imp confers some of its powers upon its master. A tele¬pathic link connects the two whenever they are within one mileof each other. This enables the master to receive all of the imp ssensory impressions, including its infra vision. The master alsogains the imps inherent 25% magical resistance and is able toregenerate just as the imp does, If the imp is within telepathicrange, the master acts as if he were one level higher than he actu¬ally is. Conversely, if the imp is more than a mile away, the mas¬ter acts as if he were one level of ability below his actual rank. Ifthe imp is killed, the master instantly drops by four levels,though these can be regained in the usual manner.Ecology: Imps are the errand boys of the powerful evil beingswho command the darkest planes. They often act as emissariesand agents, but their primary task is to enhance the spread of evilin our world,Quasits are chaotic evil counterparts to imps. The chaotic evilpriests and wizards which quasits '"serve 1 ' gain I he same benefitsand disadvantages that an imps master does. Like imps, eachquasit can assume two other forms. Those most commonly cho¬sen by quasits are bats, giant centipedes, frogs, or wolves. Theycan use their magic in any of their forms.The quasit attacks with its clawed hands (doing 1-2 pointseach) and its deadly bite (doing 1-4 points). The quasits claws arecoated in a toxin which causes anyone struck by them to saveversus poison or lose one point of dexterity for 2-12 (2d6)rounds. The effects of multiple wounds are cumulative-Quasits can turn invisible, detect good, or defect magic at will.They regenerate 1 hit point per round and can unleash a blast oftear with a 30 foot range radius once per day. Once each weekthe quasit can commune with the lower planes (asking up to 6questions).Quasits can only be harmed by cold iron or magical weapons.They are able to resist magic 25% of the time, save as it they were7 Hit Die monsters and are immune to cold, tire, and lightning,
Mephits are nasty little messengers created by powerful lowerplanes creatures. They are evil and malicious bv nature and ap¬pear on the Prime material plane only to perform evil deeds. Sixtypes of mephits are known; fire, ice. lava, mist, smoke, andsteam. Each is created from the substance for which it is named.Mephits appear as rhin, 5-foot humanoids with wings. Theirfaces have exaggerated features, including hooked noses, pointedears, wide eyes, and protruding chins. Their skin continuallyoozes the stuff from which they were made. Mephits speak acommon mephit tongue.Combat; In battle, mephits attack with either clawed hands orbreath weapons. Damage is variable depending on the type ofmephit encountered. All mephits have the ability to gtfte in othermephits; the type gated in and percentage chance for success var¬ies with the mephit initiating the gating (see below for details).Habitat,Society;Mephits love tormenting helpless creatures andbragging about their latest evil accomplishments. They wear gar¬ish, vulgar costumes in bizarre colors and outrageous designs.They give themselves pompous, impossibly long names, such asGarben aferlhal-sprite-slayer-greatest-of-all-the-st earn-mephits.Mephits assume a groveling, craven, yes-master stance aroundtheir bosses. Toward victims and each other, mephits drop theirhumble servant persona and take on the arrogant air of a superi¬or being. A limited camaraderie exists between mephits of thesame order Disputes between different types are often settled bya friendly game of tug-a-dermhuman.Mephits are usually assigned to deliver some message or pickto up packages on the lower planes, but occasionally (5 % 1 theyare sent to the Prime material plane. Missions on the Prime mate¬rial plane include retrieving a particular person, delivering a spe¬cial magical item, or just spreading a little mayhem (so folksdon t forget the lower planes are still there).Ecology: Mephits lead brief, troublesome lives. They are quicklycreated and destroyed, but they have no predetermined life span.They never eat, but must return to the substance from whichthey were formed to heal damage (usually 1 hit point per turn incontact).The most mischievous of all mephits, these fiends play terriblepranks on other mephits (such as pushing lava mephits into wa¬ter and watching them harden) and on their victims.Touching a fire mephit causes 1 point of heat damage (no sav¬ing throw). Their clawed hands rake for Id3 points of damageeach, plus 1 hit point of heat damage per hit.Fire mephits may use their breath weapon three times a day. Ithas two forms. The first is a flame jet 15 feet long and 1-footwide. This jet automatically hits one target, of the mephitschoosing, for IdS + l points of damage (half if saving throw issuccessful). The second f orm is a fan of flame covering a 120 arcdirectly in front of the mephit to a distance of 5 feet. Any crea¬ture in the arc suffers 4 points of damage, no saving throw al¬lowed.Fire mephits may also cast heat metal and magic missile (twomissiles) spells each once per day. Once every hour a fire mephitcan attempt to gate in another mephit. The chance for success is25% and the summoned mephit is either fire, lava, smoke, orsteam (equal probability of each).Ice mephits are angular in form, with translucent ice-blue skin.They live on the colder lower planes and never mix with fire,lava, smoke, or steam mephits. Ice mephits are aloof and cruel,surpassing all other mephits in the fine arts of torture and wantondestruction.In combat, ice mephits attack with two clawed hands, inflict¬ing 1-2 points of damage each. In addition, their chilling touchhas a freezing effect, reducing the victim's hit points by 1 per hitno saving throw allowed. These effects are cumulative and Iasithree to four turns, or until the victim is healed to full hit points(whichever comes first).Ice mephits may breathe a volley of ice shards three times perday. This volley automatically hits a single victim within 15 feetof the mephit. Damage is id6, halved if the victim rolls a success¬ful saving throw.Once per hour an ice mephit may attempt to gate in one othermephit. The chance of success is 25% and the summoned mephitis either mist or ice (equal probability of each)*Lava mephits are the least intelligent of all mephits. They areslow on the uptake and frequently the brunt of fire mephil jokes.Lava mephits generate extreme heat that can be felt 30 feet awayTheir daws are small and soft, causing only 1 point of damagewhen they hit, but each hit inflicts an additional ld8 points ofheat damage. The touch of a lava mephit automatically melts orburns most materials. The rate of this destruction varies fromone hour to bum through an inch of wood to three rounds tocompletely melt plate armor.Their breath weapon is a molten blob of lava usable once eve¬ry three melee rounds. This blob automatically hits one targetwithin 10 feet ot the breathing mephit (Id6 points of damage, nosaving throwh A lava mephit may use this weapon a maximumof eight times, after that, the mephit must recharge by soaking ina lava pool for on hour. Mephits may recharge during battle, ifthey come in contact with lava during combat, they regenerate 2hit points per melee round. This ability is, of course, lost if themephit is brought to 0 hit points or less, at this point the mephit isdead. These fiends may shapechange into a pool of lava 3 feet indiameter by 6 inches deep. This maneuver does not recharge thebreath weapon. They may still be harmed normally when in thislava pool form.Once every hour, a lava mephit may attempt to gate in 1-2 oth¬er mephits. The chance of success is 25%, If two are summonedthey are of the same type (equal probability of fire, lava, smoke,or steam).Mist mephits fancy themselves as spies par excellence and prac-tice this ability on other mephits. They are quick to report othermephits who show mercy or any other treasonous behavior, andthey never engage in idle banter with other mephits. Mistmephits have the ability to see clearly in fog or mist. Their skin ispale green. They never engage in melee unless they are trapped.Their soft daws inflict just I point of damage when they hit. Mistmephits may breathe a sickly, green ball of mist, every otherround, up to three times an hour This ball automatically enve¬lopes one victim within 10 feet of the breathing mephit. The vic¬tim must roll a successful saving throw vs. poison or sufferld4 + 1 points of choking damage and be blinded for ldl rounds.In addition to the breath weapon, mist mephits can create a wallof fog (as the spell) once per day (at a 3rd level ability). They canalso assume gaseous form once per day and often use this abilityto spy on others or escape combat.Once per hour a mist mephit may attempt to gate in 1-2 othermephits. The chance of success is 20%, If two mephits arrive,they are of the same type (either ice or mist, equal probability).Smoke mephits are crude and lazy. They spend most of their timelounging around invisible, smoking pipe weed, telling bad jokesabout their creators, and shirking their responsibilities,Smoke mephits' two clawed hands cause 1-2 points of damageeach. Their breath weapon consists of a sooty ball usable everyother melee round, with no limit on the number of times it can beused in a day. The sooty ball automatically strikes one creature ofthe mephit $ choice within 20 feet , causing Id4 points of damageand blinding the victim for 1-2 rounds. No saving throw is per¬mitted.Smoke mephits may cast invisibility and dancing lights onceeach per day. Once per hour they can attempt to gate in 1-2 othermephits. The chance of success is 20%. with equal probability ofthe summoned mephits being fire, lava, smoke, or steam. If twomephits appear, they are of the same type.When a smoke mephit dies, it disappears in a flash of flame.The flash causes i point of damage to all creatures within 10 feet{no saving throw).Steam mephits are the self-appointed overlords of all mephits.They frequently give orders to weaker mephits, in addition tohissing steam escaping from their pores, steam mephits leave atrail of near-boiling water wherever they walk.The hardened claws of a steam mephit cause ld4 points ofdamage each, plus 1 additional point of heat damage per touch(no saving throw). In addition, the victim is 50% likely to bestunned for one round. These effects are cumulative, so a victimraked twice could be stunned for two rounds.Steam mephits can breath a scalding jet of water every otherround; no limit to the number of times per day this can be used.This jet has a 20-foot range and automatically hits its target.Damage is ld3 points (no saving throw) with a 50% chance ofstunning the victim for one round.Once per day a steam mephit may create a rainstorm of boilingwater over a 20-by 20-fool area, This storm inflicts 2d6 points ofdamage to all victims caught in the area of effect, with no savingthrow allowed. Steam mephits may also contaminate water onceper day (reverse of purify water).Once per hour a steam mephit may attempt to gate in i-2 othermephits with a 30% chance of success. There is an equal proba¬bility that the summoned mephits are either fire, lava, smoke, orsteam. II two are summoned: they are of the same type.Unlike other mephits, who will delay an attack for as long aspossible, steam mephits are ruled by their oversized egos. Theywill even ambush even large, well-armed parties, striking firstwith boiling rainsLorms, then concentrating their breath weaponson the nearest wizard or priest.
Insects are the heartiest and the most numerous of creatures. Normalinsects are found almost everywhere. The giant variety, marry ofwhich are listed here, with added brawn and power, make tough op¬ponents.Both worker and warrior ants fight. If a warrior manages to bite, italso tries to sting for 3d4 points damage. A successful save reducesdamage to ld4, The queen has 10 HD but does not move or fight.The ant lion builds tapering pits in loose sand and waits for prey tofall in. Once the ant lion hits, all additional attacks are automatic,Aratha grasp and hold prey with their 0-foot clawed tentacles thatcan lash out 20 feet. An aratha does not bite opponents, but chewsflesh tom from prey by its tentacles.Psychornetaholism - Devotions: body equilibrium, suspend anima¬tion.Telepathy - Sciences: psychic crush. Dcuofrcms; attraction, empathymind thrash psionic blast.
Aspis cows exude a dangerous corrosive that coats the body and ad¬heres to the walls and floor of Lhe chambers. This corrosive causesdamage every round her opponents stay tn her chamber,Most combat situations are handled by aspis drones. They rise ontwo rear legs, leaving the other four limbs to wield two weapons andtwo shields, increasing its AC to 2. All aspis are immune to cold andelectrical damage: fire-based attacks cause only half damage,Aspis larvae attack with their perpetually ravenous jaws.The male assassin bug attacks first with the female close to the battle.Those bitten must save vs. poison or that part of the body is para¬lyzed for one hour The female attacks that same location the follow¬ing round to inject ld6 + 6 eggs. In ldI2 + L2 hours, the eggs hatch,and each larva causes 1 point of damage per hour. After two weeks,the larva emerge as adults. Only powerful spells like wish and limitedwish will erase the infestation.Worker bees use their stinger in combat. The victim must save vs,poison or suffer and additional ld4 points of damage. Bees lose theirstinger after one use and die in an hour. If encountered at the hive,there will be 20 times the normal number of bees.Soldier bees are identical to worker bees, except their sting causesmore damage, and the victim must save with a “1 penalty.Bumblebee poison causes an additional Ido points ot damage unless asave vs. poison (with a ”1 penalty) is made. If encountered at ornear the nest, there will be ld6+6 bumblebees, and a combativequeen. The queen has Sd4 HD and a sting that causes Id8 points ofdamage. The poison from her sting causes an additional 2-8 points ofdamage if a save vs. poison at a “2 penalty is failed. Bumblebees donot lose their stingers after use*If a group of people are within 20 feet of a chirping cave cricket, thenoise drowns out all speech and vocal spell casting. The noise inhibitsthe victim's ability to hear approaching predators and enemies.Giant dragonflies gain a “3bonus to initiative rolls and a + 4 ArmorClass bonus against missile weapons, A dragonfly scoops tiny- andsmall-sized creatures into its leg basket and devours them in midair.When captured, its victim is attacked automatically. When attackingman- or large-sized creatures, the dragonfly darts in to bite with itsmandibles, and backs up, always facing its opponent.These larva surprise their prey 50% of the time. Their mandibles arecovered with a rubbery organ when not in use; so even before theattack, they appear to be inoffensive, toothless creatures.The ear seeker needs warm places to lay its eggs, favoring locations likeears. The creature lays S + Ld8 eggs that hatch in 4d6 hours. The larva eatthe surrounding tissue, deafening the victim. Constantly burrowingdeeper into the victim s head where food and warmth arc plentiful, thehost has a 90% chance of dying m ld4 days. After this time, the earseekers emerge from the infested ear as adults, A cure disease removesthe infestation but does not return the loss of hearing.In addition to its mandibles, the giant firefly can brighten its abdomenonce every turn, creating a beam of greenish light that causes 5d4 pointsof damage; one-half damage if a save vs. wands is successful.This breed of giant fly prefers carrion, offal, and the like. They are,however, attracted to sweet odors, and creatures covered with bloodor open wounds.The largest of all giant flies, the giant horsefly alights on any creatureto attack for blood with its tuberous mouth. After biting, the gianthorsefly causes an equal amount of damage the next round by draw¬ing blood, unless driven off.When a fyrefly contacts flammable objects, these items must save vs.normal fire or be consumed. Persons in burning clothing suffer ld6points of damage. Hits that do not strike burnable material, cause Ipoint of damage to the victim.Horax attack in packs, gaining a -1 bonus to initiative rolls. Once ahorax scores a hit, it maintains its hold, causing damage every round.The solitary giant hornet swoops down on its prey holding with itslegs while its stinger repeatedly stabs the victim* A failed save vs*poison causes an additional 5d6 points of damage and 2db hours ofparalyzation. Hornets do not lose their stingers when they attacks.Pemicons attack by swarming victims and tearing at exposed fleshwith their huge mandibles. Able to worm their way under clothingand armor, no one is completely safe from these creatures. When theswarm hits, the victim suffers IdlO points of damage and 1 point ofConstitution, If the Constitution dips below 3, the victim falls uncon¬scious; below 1 and the victim dies. One point of Constitution is re¬covered per day, regardless of healing methods.The gargantuan praying mantis grabs prey, that inadvertently comestoo dose, with its front spiny arms. Besides its two daws, it biteswith its strong mandibles, removing and chewing flesh with each un¬erring strike*Groups of 30 or more worker termites are accompanied by soldiers.Soldier termites can spit an irritating liquid like kerosene once perturn at a range of 10 feet. This flammable liquid blinds creatures, for5d4 rounds, that do not save vs, poison, If ignited, termite spittlecauses 4d4 points of damage. King termites have double range spittleand can use this attack every other round, but the queen lacks thisability. Both the queen and king (and the eggs? are guarded by twicethe number of workers and soldiers encountered normally, and whoattack with a +i to hit and a +5 bonus to morale rolls.These creatures drop on victims from trees, stalactites, or rock for¬mations, After the initial hit, the tick drains ldb hit points of bloodevery round until its drain total equals its hit point total. A victim hasa 50% chance of contracting a fatal disease that kills the host in 2d4days unless a cure disease is cast.These cooperative insects attack with both their bite and stinger. Thevenom carried by wasps is identical to that held by the giant hornet.Wasps do not lose their stingers when they attack*
Tropical, sub¬tropical or temp¬erate/Forest. hills,and plainslively harmless. But in swarms, these insects can cause immensedamage to fields and forests, as well as threatening the lives of allcreatures in their path.The velvet ant resembles a plump version of the common ant,except for the soft fuzz that covers its entire body. The fuzz isusually red or black, but it can also be yellow, brown, or orange.Combat: A velvet ant swarm eats everything in its path, animalmatter as well as vegetation. To determine the size of a swarm,roll IdlQQ and multiply the result by 1,000. There are about 100ants per square foot; therefore, a swarm of 10.000 ants forms ablock about 10 feet per side*If a swarm comes in contact with an obstacle, it turns 90 andcontinues. A victim in contact with a swarm has an 80% chanceper round of being bitten and suffering ld4 points of damage.The victim must roll a successful saving throw vs. poison orsuffer intense pain for the next 2d4 turns, making all attack anddamage rolls with a -2 penalty during this time.Each point of damage inflicted on an insect swarm kills ld20insects* They may be scattered with smoke or fire: immersion inwater washes them off. Li half of a swarm is killed, the survivorsattempt to scatter and hide. If an entire swarm is killed, award975 experience points.The grasshopper is about 2 inches in length and is usually greenor brown in color. The grasshopper can make leaps of about fourfeet. Locusts are a type of grasshopper, with shorter antennae.They can rub their hind legs against their wings to produce a dis¬tinctive chirp.Combat: Grasshopper and locust swarms fly from place toplace in search of lush fields on which to settle and consume,These swarms move in straight lines and are easy to avoid.To determine the size of a grasshopper swarm, roll IdlQQ andmultiply the result by 10,000. Multiply this result by 2 when de¬termining the size of a locust swarm. There are about 20 grass-hoppers or locusts per square foot (for convenience, assume thereare 20 insects per cubic foot when approximating the size of fly¬ing swarm).A victim in contact with a grasshopper or locust swarm has a90% chance per round of being bitten and suffering 1 point ofdamage. Additionally, victims within a cloud of these insectshave their vision reduced to 2d4 feet.Each point of damage inflicted on an insect swarm kills ld2Qinsects. They may be scattered with smoke or fire; immersion inwater washes them off* if half of a swarm is killed, the survivorsattempt to scatter. 11 an entire swarm is killed, award 2,000 expe¬rience points.H a bi tat/So riety: Insect swarms are migratory, sleeping at nightwherever they happen to be. Females lay up to 100 eggs everyyear* These insects have no leaders or any specialized workers.They do not collect treasure.Ecology: Velvet ants eat seeds, grasses, and meat, especially en¬joying carrion. The poison of vel vet ants renders them inedible tocarnivores.Grasshoppers and locusts prefer seeds and grains. Snakes,mice, birds, and spiders are among these insects' numerous natu¬ral enemies. Grasshoppers and locusts can be eaten by carni¬vores.
During darknessEmotionsNot ratableQxldZONeutral (evil)The term "intellect devourer" refers only to this creature's adultform: its larva is an ustilagor. Both resemble a brain on four legs.The body of the intellect devourer has a crusty protective cover¬ing, and its legs are bestial, jointed, and clawed. The ustilagor’sbody is soft and moist and usually covered with a gray fungus: ithas a 3Toot-k>ng tendril at the front, and its legs are spindly andcoraLIike. Though both forms are about brain-sized, the adultcan use psionics to alter its size.Combat: The ustilagor attacks by striking with Us flexible tend¬ril, The tendril secretes an alkaline substance which causesld4+l damage on a successful hit, as well as another ld4 + ldamage the following round, unless the victim makes a successfulsaving throw vs, poison. The creature is quite agile, and canjump and dart quickly.The ustilagor can also attack psionically, first making contactwith a victim a mind. It uses aversion to give a victim an aversionto fungus or Lo a certain area; id insinuation to effectively para¬lyze the victim: or tdempathic projection to increase an oppo¬nent's dislike or distrust of companions.Despite its psionic prowess, the ustilagor cannot be attackedmentally (magically or psionically) except by psionic blast. Itsfungal growth interferes with and prevents mental attacks, pro¬tects the ustilagor from drying out. prevents cerebral parasitesfrom attacking, and makes the creature immune to fungal attacksand any power that reads or affects an aura.The adult form also prefers to attack with psionics, though itsthree-taloned paws can all be used in the same round, as the crea¬ture jumps on an opponent and rakes.Aside from its regular psionic powers (see below), the adult intel¬lect devourer has specialized forms of three psionic powers; these areconstantly in effect and cost no PSPs, but they do count as psionicactivity for detection purposes. Through a special form of energycontainment, the intellect devourer is immune to damage from nor¬mal and magical fins, and takes only one hit point per die of electri¬cal damage: a form of split personality is always in effect, allowingthe creature to attack with psionics and claws in the same round;and it has psionic sense with a 60 foot range.The intellect devourer is immune to weapons with less than a+3 enchantment, and takes only 1 point of damage per hit fromthose weapons which can harm them, A death $pell has only a25% chance of success, but power word: kill is effective. A pro¬tection from evil keeps the intellect devourer at bay, and brightlight (including that caused by fire) drives it away.An intellect devourer hunts and stalks psionic creatures. Afterkilling a psionic victim, it sometimes uses reduction to enter thebody, devour the brain, and occupy its place. It reads the victim'smind as it devours it, then animates the body from within, usingit to find other minds to attack and devour.Level D&Sci/Dev At tack;Defense Score PSPsLarva 2 2/1/5 H/M- 10 150Intellect devourers have the following psionic powers; ustilagorhave only those powers marked by asterisks:* P$yehornetabtilism ■ Sciences: ectoplasmic form'. Devo¬tions: body equilibrium*, chameleon power, expansion, reduc¬tion,* Telepathy - Sciences: domination, mind I ink. Devotions:aversion*, contact*, ego whip, ESP, id insinuation*, tdempathicprojection**Habitat/Society; Intellect devourers dwell beneath the ground orin dismal wilderness areas. Their reproductive method is un¬known. The intellect devourer rarely protects iLs young, and mayeven devour them. Ustilagor develop a symbiotic relationshipwith a bizarre fungus which feeds on residual thought emana¬tions from the ustilagor's victims. An ustilagor becomes an adultby consuming the brain of a psionic creature.Ecology: Mind flayers raise intellect devourers. treating the usti¬lagor as culinary delights, and using adults as watch dogs. Bothforms of the creature can be used as components in items andpotions related to ESP and mind control.
The invisible stalker is a creature from the elemental plane of Air.Those encountered on the Prime Material plane have almost al¬ways been summoned by wizards to fulfill a specific task.The true form of the invisible stalker is unknown. On the Ma¬terial, Astral, or Ethereal planes, the invisible stalker can only beperceived as a shimmering air mass which looks much like therefraction effect caused by hot air passing in front of coldInvisible stalkers understand the common speech of men, butcan not speak it. They can converse only in their own language,which sounds much like the roaring and whooshing of a greatwind storm.Combat: Invisible stalkers attack by using the air itself as aweapon. It is capable of creating a sudden, intense vortex thatbatters a victim for 4-16 (4d4) points of damage. Such attacksaffect a single victim on the same plane as the invisible stalker.Due to their invisibility, these creatures impose a -6 penaltyon the surprise rolls of those they choose to attack. Similarly allopponents who are unable to see or detect invisible foes are at a~2 on their attack rolls, Although they are fully imjisibfc on thePrime Material plane, their outlines can be dimly perceived onthe Astral or Ethereal planes.Invisible stalkers can only be killed on the elemental plane ofAir. If attacked on another plane, they automatically return totheir home plane when their total hit points are exceeded by thedamage they sufferedHabitat/Societyi Little is known about the lives of these crea¬tures on their home plane. It is assumed that they are similar tonormal air elemental* when encountered there,Those present on the material plane are there as the result of aconjuration by some wizard. This magic causes the creature toserve its summoner for a time. The conjurer retains full com¬mand of the stalker until it either fulfills its duties or is defeatedand driven back to its home plane. Once given a task, an invisi¬ble stalker is relentless. They are faultless trackers who can detectany trail less than a day old. If ordered to attack, they will do sowith great fury and will cease Lheir efforts only upon their owndestruction or the direct orders of their master. Once their mis¬sion is accomplished, the creature is free to return to its homeplane.The in visible stalker is, at best, an unwilling servant. It resentsany task assigned to it, although brief, uncomplicated laborsmay be seen as something of a diversion and thus undertakenwith little resentment. Tasks that require a week or more of itstime will drive the invisible stalker to pervert the stated intent ofthe command. Such commands must be carefully worded andcome from a powerful wizard. An invisible stalker may look fora loop hole in the command as a means of striking back at itsmaster. For example, a simple command such as 'keep me safefrom all harm" may result in the stalker carrying the conjurerback to the elemental plane of air and leaving him there in a wellhidden location.Each day of the invisible stalker's indenturedness there is a 1 %cumulative chance that the creature will seek a means to pervertits commands and free itself of servitude. If no option is open, thecreature must continue to serve.Ecology: Invisible stalkers are a species unwillingly transplant¬ed to the Prime Material plane. They are slaves whose terms ofservitude dominate their brief stays. Those who have been sub¬jected to great hardship, assigned very difficult tasks, or w r hohave faced death at the hands of humanoids, tend to retain a dis¬trust or outright hatred of them. Those that have had an easytime during past periods of service or who are first time arrivalson the Prime Material plane may be easier to deal with. Suchfeelings may carry over to influence encounters with humanoidstraveling in the aerial plane. Anyone who has befriended an in¬visible stalker in the past will f ind that voyages through the planeof elemental Air are far less hazardous than they might otherwisehave been.Invisible stalkers only obey those who actually summon themand few wizards can be commissioned to summon such a beingon another's behalf. Some mercenary wizards have been able toconstruct the necessary summons onto scrolls that are usable byothers. These sell for between 5,000 and 10,000 gp and are verydangerous to use. Even the slightest error can cause users of suchscrolls to come to a tragic end.Average to High (8-14)F, R, S (in lair only)Chaotic evilIxitxachitl are a race of intelligent, aquatic beings that resemblesmall manta rays with barbed tails. They have an evil dispositionand worship evil powers: they love to hunt marine humanoids,and then sacrifice or devour their catch.[xitxachitl is both singular and plural; it is properly pro¬nounced ish-it-SHACH-ith though many refer to them as icks-it-ZACH-if-ul or even icks-ii-zuh-dut-ul.Combat: A favored tactic of ixitxachitl is to hide in the sand ofthe ocean floor, wait for prey to pass by, then spring up and bitethem. The creatures are not very stealthy, and this tactic givesthem normal chances to surprise their prey.Some ixitxachitl act as priests, learning special versions ofspells which have only verbal components, from the followingspheres: Charm, Divination, Elemental (Water), Necromantic*Healing, Protection, and Sun (Darkness only). For every 10 ixitx-achitl encountered, there is one ixitxachitl with the abilities of a2nd-level priest. For every 20, there is an individual with thepowers of a 3rd-levei priest. For every 50, there is one with 2 +2Hit Dice and the abilities of a 5th-Ievel priest,When more than 50 are encountered, they are led by a highpriest with 4+4 HD and 8th4evel ability. The high priest is ac¬companied by two guardian priests, each with 3+3 HD and 6th-level ability. Guardian and high priests often have treasure typeU, with magical items that can be used without hands.For every 20 ixitxachitl encountered, there is a 50% chancethey will be accompanied by a vampiric ixitxachitL One in onehundred of these are greater vampiric ixitxachitl, but these arerarely encountered outside a city.Habitat Society i Though they are occasionally encountered inrivers, ixitxachitl live in shallow ocean depths, They usually havea community of 10-100 individuals, which lives in a maze of cor¬ridors inside a coral reef. A community usually has 20-200 hu¬manoid slaves to do heavy labor for them, such as carving corri¬dors. The community's entrance b hidden.Large communities that have strong leaders, like a greatervampiric ixitxachitl, are sometimes built on the ocean floor*These large cities hold pyramids and other buildings which serveas lairs for small groups of the creatures. Rumors tell of ixitxa¬chitl cities with populations in the thousands. The strongest ixitx-achitl in the community leads its religious hierarchy, whichcontrols the lives of the populace*Ecology: Ixitxachitl have no natural predators, though they havemany enemies, ranging from sahuagin to humans. They are vi¬cious predators who prey on almost any living creature; they of¬ten over hunt a region, eliminating all life forms, forcing theixitxachitl to find new hunting grounds.These rare creatures are even more dangerous than the others*Each has 2+2 HD and regenerates 3 hp per round. In addition toits normal damage, the bite of a vampiric ixitxachitl drains onelife energy level. They look no different than other ixitxachitLand often serve as guards tor their leaders.These creatures are rare indeed- they achieve greater status onlyby being bitten by an existing greater vampiric ixitxachitl. Thesecreatures have 8 + 8 Hit Dice. They drain two life energy levelswith a bite (except when the bite is performed on another vam¬piric member of their race), A greater vampiric Ixitxachitl is thecenter of the large cities of its kind; it is their tyrannical ruler andthey worship it as the incarnation of a greater power. Captivesare brought to it to be drained of life.
The jackalwere is a terrible and savage creature which preys onunsuspecting travelers and other demihumans that it can am¬bush. Its ability to alter its shape at will makes it a most danger¬ous foe.The jackalwere can be found in any ot three forms, showing nopreference for any one over the others. The first of these is that ofa normal jackal. In this form it will often run and hunt with jack¬al packs. Its second form is a six foot talk half-human /half-jackalhybrid which stands erect. In its third form, the [ackalwere isphysically indistinguishable from normal human beings. The ex¬act physical characteristics of the jackal were s human form variesaccording to the desires of the monsterCombat: In its jackal form, the monster conforms to the statis¬tics presented elsewhere in this volume. A careful observer, how¬ever, will find that Lhe creature does not act ini the manner typicalof a normal jackal, for it is far more aggressive.In its hybrid form, the jackalwere can attack with either its biteor with any weapons in hand. Because it has a great thirst for theblood of humans and demihumans, the jackalwere will use itsbite whenever possible. Still. it will not avoid the use of weaponsthat will insure its victory in combat.In its human form, the jackalwere can only attack with weap¬ons, Although it may employ any manner of weapon, it greatlyenjoys those which will cut and tear the flesh of its victims. Insome cases, a jackalwere has been known to feed on the bodies offallen enemies without reverting to its jackal or hybrid form.In all forms, the jackalwere possesses a magical gaze. If an un¬suspecting victim meets the monster's gaze, the victim must saveversus spell or fall deeply asleep: the effect is identical to that ofthe steep spell. Note that hostile, scared, or excited people are notconsidered to be unsuspecting.The jackalweres special defenses also function in all threeforms. Only +1 or better magkal weapons or those forged horncold iron will cause any damage to the jackalwere. Jackalweresrevert to their jackal form after death.the suspicions of its target, often pretending to be injured orotherwise in need, until it can employ its gaze attack. If this failsand the jackalwere is confronted with forceful resistance it willdecide whether to flee or press the attack based on its estimationof its victim's strength.The jackalwere spends its life hunting and killing any humansand demihumans it comes across. They roam the world in eitherthe jackal or human form, seeking humanoids to kill, eat, androb. They are sly creatures and masters of deceit.Jackalweres are able to mate only in their jackal form. Theymay produce offspring either by mating with true jackals or oth¬er jackal weres, but only those young who were not of mixedblood will be jackal weres themselves. The children of a jackaland jackalwere mating will be jackals, although they will be un¬naturally aggressive.Female jackal weres give birth in five months to a litter of 1-4pups. These are identical to jackal pups although they initiallyhave 1 Hit Die. The pups grow quickly and add an additional HitDie each year. Their jackal forms reach full growth at three yearsand pups are locked in that form for their first two years. At agetwo they gain the ability to assume their hybrid form and at agethree they gain the ability to assume a human form which Is ap¬parently nine years of age. The human form grows at triple thenormal human rate. If a parent in human form is discovered withits pups, it will often try to pass them off as pets.Jackalweres may (20%) travel in the company of 1-6 normaljackals. Although these jackals are normal in every regard, theinfluence of the jackalwere tends to make them more fierce thannormal. Jackals under the influence of a jackalwere will behunters instead of scavengers.Ecology: Jackalweres will not serve any but the most evil of hu¬manoids. and even then only if they have the opportunity to slaymore humans and demihumans than they could on their own.Habitat,'Society: When the jackalwere locates a victim it willassume human shape and approach its prey. It will seek to easeKenku are bipedal humanoid birds that use their powers to an¬noy and inconvenience the human and demihuman races.The typical kenku resembles a humanoid hawk wearing hu¬man clothing. Kenku have both arms and wings. The wings areusually folded across the back and may be mistaken at a distancefor a large backpack. Height ranges from 5 to 7 feet. The feathersare predominantly brown with white underfeathers and faceCombat; All kenku have the skills of 4th-Ievel thieves. They areexpert fighters and usually attack with a scimitar or quarterstaff. Ifunarmed, they attack with either pair of claws (two attacks for ld4points of damage apiece) and their beak Cld6 points of damage). Ifthey are on foot, they use the hand daws. If in flight, the foot dawsare used. They do not usually kill unless their own lives are threat¬ened by the survival of their foe. All kenku have weII-developed dis¬guise skills. They have a 50% chance of passing for human,although their disguises often have telltale large noses.A 3-Hit Die kenku has one Ist-level wizard spell, usually magicmissile. Once each 30 days a kenku can shape change and retainthat shape for up to seven days. A 4-Hit Die kenku has an extratsTlevei spell often shocking grasp. They gain the innate abilityto become invisible with no limitation on duration or frequencyof use. A 5-Hit Dice kenku leader gains an additional 2nd-Ievelmage spell usually mirror image or web r and the innate ability tocg/I lightning (the same as the 3rd-level priest spell).Habitat-Society: Kenku are a secretive race that lives amongthe human and demihuman races without the bulk of the popula¬tion ever being aware of their presence.If a group of kenku is encountered, the group's size determines itscomposition. A group of five or fewer contains two 2-Hit Dice andthree 3-Hit Dice kenku. A group of six or seven has a leader with 4Hit Dice, three kenku with 3 Hit Dice, and the rest have 2 Hit Dice.A group of eight kenku adds a supreme leader of 5 Hit Dice,Kenku do not speak; although they may give out bird-likesquawks, these are gibberish, Kenku apparently communicatewith each other telepathically, They are adept at symbols, signKenku may appear to be friendly, helpful, and even generous.They freely give treasure to humans and demihumans, but it israrely genuine and crumbles into dust within a day. They mayoffer nonverbal advice to humanoids, but this is carefully de¬signed to mislead, It may actually lead the party into dangers anddifficulties they might otherwise have avoided. As a rule ofthumb, kenku have only a 5% chance of actually helping people.The actual structure of kenku society is elusive. The kenkuthemselves either refuse to comment or lie. Those kenku lairsthat have been encountered tend to be small underground cham¬bers or cave complexes. It is believed that large caverns deep un¬derground may hold sizeable kenku communities, includingindividuals of 6 Hit Dice or more and with greater magicalpowers.Kenku reproduction is similar to that of large birds. The femalelays a clutch of two to four eggs that hatch after 60 days. New hatch¬lings are featherless, helpless, and have 1 hit point each. Hatchlingsgrow swiftly and gain 1 hit point each month. Within six to eightmonths they have adult feathers and are able to function indepen¬dently as 1-Hit Die kenku. At this point they can begin to learn touse the skills they need as adults (thieving, fighting, disguise). If ahatchling is captured, it either lacks this training or has whateverminimal skills it acquired before capture.\bunger kenku (3 Hit Dice or less) are reckless and prone toaudacious plans. They have been known to pass themselves offas gods and collect the worshipers's offerings. Older kenku aremore reserved and cunning, preferring to kidnap wealthy hu¬mans and demihumans as a source of revenue.Ecology: Domestically raised kenku are prized as servants,Kenku eggs are commonly sold tor 250 gp P hatchlings for 300-500gp. However, this is a form of slave trade, with all the attendantcomplications. If a kenku discovers captive kenku, it will attemptto secretly rescue the captive and, if possible, kidnap the slavetrader or owner. They will avenge slain kenku.
The ki-rin is a noble creature that roams the sky in search of gooddeeds to reward or malefactors to punish.The ki-rin s coat is covered with luminous golden scales like asunrise on a clear morning. The thick mane and tail are a darkergold, live horn and hooves are gold tinged with pink. The eyesare a deep violet The ki-rin has a melodious voice.Ki-rin speak their own language. Since they are telepathic,they are able to mentally or verbally converse with virtually anyliving thing.Combat: The ki-rin can physically attack with its powerful hooves(2d4 points of damage each) or a unicorn-like hom that gains a +3bonus to its attack roll and inflicts 3d6 points of damage.They can employ spells as if they were 18th4evel mages. Eachday they may use nine Ist-level spells, eight 2nd-level spells, sev¬en 3rd-level spells, etc. , all the way to one 9th-level spell.The ki-rin's telepathy enables them to read conscious thoughtsand are thus nearly impossible to surprise. The ki-rin also possessa variety of magical powers that can each be used once each day.They can create nutritious food and beverages for 2dl2 people,as well as 32 cubic feet of soft goods or 18 cubic feet of woodenitems. These are permanent creations. The ki-rin can create metalitems with a total weight of up to 2,000 gp weight, but such itemshave very short life spans. In general the harder the substance,the shorter the life span; for example, adamantite lasts an hour,while gold lasts ld4 +1 days.The ki-rin can also generate illusions with audial, visual andolfactory components. These illusions last without further con¬centration until the illusion is either magically dispelled or dis¬rupted by disbelief. The ki-rin can assume gaseous form t windwalk, summon weather, and call lightning as well. When a ki-rinconjures things of the sky or things that involve the air, the crea¬ture or magic produced is at twice normal strength, including hitpoints and the damage inflicted by its attacks. They can enter theEthereal and Astral planes at will.Habitat Society; The kj-rm are a race of aerial creatures thatrarely set hoof on solid ground- Only the males ever approachthe ground. No encounter with a female ki-rin has ever been re¬corded, although it is certain such beings exist. Likewise noyoung ki-rln has ever been encountered, thus details of their re¬production are unknown. Ki-rin are reticent about these topics,Ki-rin come to the aid of humanoids if asked properly or if suchbeinp are faced with a powerful, extremely evil being. Ki-rin believein self-improvement, though, and do not casually come to a human-oids aid except in the most dire of circumstances*Ki-rin sustain themselves by creating their own food and drink.They are highly imaginative with their creations. They may estab¬lish a lair high atop a mountain or plateau. Such sites are virtuallyimpossible to reach without resort to flight or climbing. The lairsmay have an stony exterior crafted from local materials. It is en¬hanced by magically created wood and stout doth. The interiorstend to be luxurious. The ki-rin are able to craft fine cloth, tapes¬tries, pillows, and other comforts. An occupied lair is kept deanby carefully controlled winds that sweep out debris.Although ki-rin are generous and not avaricious, they still tendto accumulate treasure. These may be their own creations, giftsfrom friends and allies, souvenirs of past travels and exploits, fineslevied against malefactors, or booty taken from vanquished foes.Ecology: Ki-rin spend most of their time pursuing their own af¬fairs. They often monitor the activities of powerful evil creaturesand beings. If such beings become too malevolent, the ki-rin actagainst them.Ki-rin may reward allies or needy individuals by creating foodand valuables.The intact skin of a ki-rin is worth 25,000 gp. Possession of sucha item is dangerous, due to the retribution that may be visitedupon the possessor by other ki-rin, sympathetic humanoids, or in¬telligent lawful good monsters.
Psychokinesis—Sciences: project Force; Devotions: soften, levi¬tation.Telepathy—Sciences: psionic blast, tower of iron will; Devo¬tions: awe. psychic crush, id insinuation, thought shield, intellectfortress, life detection, contact.The kirre is one of the more vicious animals of the forests andjungles of Athas. Resembling a tiger in many ways, the kirre is abeast not to be trifled with.At first glance, the kirre looks like a great cat, but upon clos¬er examination, the differences quickly become clear, The kirreis 8 Feet in length and has eight legs, each ending in paws whichsport very sharp daws. The kirre also has large horns on eithersides of its head and a sharp barbed tail spike often used as aweapon. The mouth of the kirre is large and has sharp, canineteeth, which are used mostly for tearing food that has beenkilled. The kirre is a fur-covered animal with coloration similarto a tiger {both are striped). But where are a tiger is striped inblack and orange, the kirre is striped in brown and grey. Thiscoloration is consistent all over the kirre's body, with the excep¬tion of its face, which is all grey. The yellow eyes of this crea¬ture against the dark grey fur of its face create a fearsomeappearance.Combat; Being predators by nature, kirre are very well equippedfor combat. This creature is very quick in melee combat, andtherefore receives a -1 modifier to its initiative rolls, if the DM isusing the "Optional Modifiers to Initiative", kirres are treated assmall creatures, receiving only a +3 modifier, instead of the nor¬mal + 6 for large creatures.During each round of combat, a kirre can attack up to seventimes, using its limbs, teeth, horns, and tail as weapons. It firstattacks with its foremost claws, followed by Us bite and horn at¬tack. It then attacks with its secondary claws and its tail. Eachdaw does ld4 points of damage, both the bite and tail do ld6points, and the horn attack does ld8 points.Uke many of the creatures of the Athas, kirres have naturalpsionic powers. Instead of its multiple attacks, each round thekirre can use one of its psionic powers as can any normal psioniccreature. Also, the kirre has natural psionic defense modes thatare always considered to be "on7 These provide the creature itwith a powerful defense against psionic opponents (assuming thekirre has enough PSPs to power the defense mode being used),Habitat/Sodety: Kirres are normally solitary creatures, until theapproach of their mating season, at which time a male and fe¬male will join and produce offspring. Kirre litters number fromthree to five young. Kirres are mammals, and females producemilk for their young. Young kirres survive on milk for the firstfive months, at which point they begin to eat solid food such assmall forest animals and other mammals.When the female is ready to give birth, both she and her matewill make a den in a remote area of the forest inhere they will beunlikely to be disturbed. During the first five months after birth,both the male and female protect their den ferociously, attempt¬ing to kill any creature who threatens their young.EcoSogy: Kirre are a favorite game of many hunting tribes ofraces who live in the forests of Athas, The meal from kirres issome of the finest on all of Athas, and it is sought after by many.Aside from a source of food, the kirre also has other uses whenkilled. The creature's horns can be cut off and used as spearheads; in some cases, they can be carved into ornate daggers. .Al¬so, the tail of a kirre has a sharp, bone spike at its end that can befashioned into either an arrow head or a dart,.
Koboids are a cowardly, sadistic race of short humanoids that vigorouslycontest the human and demi-human races for living space and food. Theyespecially dislike gnomes and attack them on sight.Barely clearing 3 feet in height, kobo Ids have scaly hides that rangefrom dark, rusty brown to a rusty black. They smell of damp dogs andstagnant water Their eyes glow tike a bright red spark and they ha ve twosmall horns ranging from tan to white. Because of the koboids' fondnessfor wearing raggedy garb of red and orange, their non-prehensile rat-liketails, and their language i which sounds like small dogs yapping), thesefell creatures are often not taken seriously. This is often a fatal mistake,for what they lack in *i£o and strength they make up in ferocity andtenacity,Koboids speak their own language: some (73%) speak ore and goblin.Combat: The kobold approach to combat uses overwhelming odds ortrickery, Koboids will attack gnomes on sight, but will think twice aboutattacking humans, elves or dwarves unless the koboids outnumber themby at least two to one, They often hurl javelins and spears, preferring notto dose until they see that their enemies have been weakened.Koboids attack in overwhelming waves. Should the koboids be re¬duced to only a three to two ratio in their favor, they must make a mor¬ale check. Koboids are wary of spellcasters and will aim for them whenpossible.Tins diminutive race also enjoys setting up concealed pits with spikes,crossbows, and other mechanical traps. They usually have view portsand murder holes near these traps so that they can pour flaming oil, mis¬sile weapons, or drop poisonous insects on their victims.Kobold war bands are armed with spiked dubs, axes, javelins, shortswords and spears. Their shields are seldom metal, but are normally woodor wicker. Chiefs and guards tend to have the best weapons available.Koboids have 60-foot infra vision but do not see well in bright sunlight,suffering a “1 on their attack rolls.Habitat'Society Koboids live In dark, damp places underground and inovergrown forests They can be found in almost any climate. As koboids aregood miners, any area with potential for mining is fair game for settlement.The average kobold tribe has 40 * 400 (4dI0 x 101 adult males. For eve¬ry 40 koboids in a band there will be one leader and two bodyguards {AC6: HD 1 —1; hp 4 each; damage 1-6). In a lair there will be 5-20 (5d4)bodyguards, females equal lo 50% of the males, young equal to 10% ofthe males and 30-300 (idlOxlO) eggs. There will also be a chief and 2-8guards {AC 5: HD 1+1; hp 7 each; damage 1-8) Further, there is a 65%chance there will be guard animals: {70%} 2-5 wild boars {AC 7; HD3 +3; damage 3d4 gore) or (30%) 1-4 giant weasels (AC 6: HD 3 + 3; dam¬age 2d6 bite and blood drain). There may be one or more shamans,Their society is tribal but can be further broken up into war bandsbased on specific clans. As many as 10 families can be part of a dan, andeach clan usually is responsible for controlling the area in a 10 mile radiusfrom the lair. Koboids recover treasure from the bodies of their victimsand often carry them back to their lair as food In some instances, ko¬boids will not kill their victims, but will sell them as slaves.Koboids are distrustful of strangers. They hate brownies, pixies,sprites and gnomes. Gnomes are never eaten or taken prisoner.Ecology: Perhaps koboids are so cruel because they are easy prey forlarger humanoids and hungry monsters. They have many enemies, andeven the dwarves have had to admit that the numerous kobold-goblinwars have kept the number of goblins down tn a safe tevel.Lfrds are distant relatives of koboids. Three feet tall, with short Ivoryhorns, their bodies* are frail and covered with mottled yellow to brick redscales. Their leathery, batlike wings span S feet.Urds have 60-foot infravision and prefer to hunt at night, droppingjagged stones (2-3 pounds each) (rum the air. Unsuspecting victims areAC 10 for the attack roll. Actively dodging opponents are considered AC2 before modifications to Dexterity. Rocks cause 2d4 points of damage.Some urds (25%) carry light sprears {Id4 damage),A band of 20 urds is accompanied by a subchieftain (AC 7, 7 hp). Urdflocks of 100 or more include the chieftain (10 hp, 50% have magicalleather armor L Urd lairs contain idb shamans able to speak with bats asper speak uiiffi animals.Urd life spans can exceed 100 years, but they rarely live past 50.2-5 and/or by weapon typeSec belowSee belowSee belowM (higher levels L>Normal: 175Captain: 3,000Lieutenant: 1,400Whip: 420Monitor: 975Kuo-toa are an ancient race of fish-men that dwells undergroundand harbors a deep hatred of surface dwellers and sunlight.A kuo-toan presents a cold and horrible appearance. A typicalspecimen looks much like a human body, albeit a paunchy one,covered in scales and topped with a fish's head. The huge fisheyes tend to swivel in different directions when observing an areaor creature. The hands and feet are very long, with three fingersand an opposing digit, partially webbed. The legs and arms areshort for the body size. Its coloration is pale grey, with under-tones of tan or yellow in males only. The skin has a sheen from itsslimy covering. The color darkens when the kuo-toan is angryand pales when it is badly frightened, A strong odor of dead fishfollows it around,It wears no clothing, only leather harnesses for its weaponsand gear. Typically, a kuo-toan warrior carries daggers, spears,shields, harpoons and weighted throwing nets.Kuo-toa speak the strange subterranean trade language com¬mon to most intelligent underworld dwellers. Additionally, theyspeak their own arcane tongue and have empathic contact withmost fish. Their religious speech is a corruption of the languageused on the elemental plane of Water: if a kuo-toan priest is in agroup of kuo-toa, it is 75% unlikely that a creature native to theplane of Water will attack, for the priest will request mercy in thename of the Sea Mother, bllbdoolpoolp.Combat: These creatures normally travel in well-armed bands . Ifmore than 20 kuo-toa are encountered, it Is 50% likely that theyare within ld6 miles of their lair. For every four normal warriorsencountered there is an additional fighter of 3rd or 4th level. Forevery eight normal fighters there is an additional fighter ol 5th or6th level. For every 12 normal kuo-toa in the group there is acleric/thief of ld4 + 3 levels each. If more than 20 normal fightersare encountered, the group is a war consisting of the following:One IQth-kvel fighter as CaptainTwo fJth-level fighters as LieutenantsFour 3rd/3rd-level fighter' thief WhipsOne Monitor (see below)The whips are fanatical devotees of the Sea Mother goddess ofthe kuo-toa. They inspire the troops to stand firm and fight with¬out quarter for the glory of their ruler and their deity,It is 50% probable that any kuo-toan priest above 6th level isarmed with a pincer staff. This is a 5-foot-long pole topped by athree-foot-long claw. If the user scores a hit, the claw has dosedupon the opponent, making escape impossible. The weapon canbe used only on enemies with a girth range between an elf and agnolL It is 10% probable that both arms are pinned by the clawand 40% probable that one arm is trapped. If the victim is righthanded, the daw traps the left hand 75% of the time. Trappedopponents lose shield and Dexterity bonuses. If the weapon armis trapped, the victim cannot attack and the Dexterity bonus islost, but the shield bonus remains.The harpoon is mostly used only by higher level fighters. It is awickedly barbed throwing weapon with a 30 yard range. It inflicts2d6 points of damage, exdusive of bonuses. Victims must roll a suc¬cessful saving throw of 13 + on ld20 to avoid being snagged by theweapon. Man-sized or smaller beings who fail this saving throw arejerked off their feet and stunned for ld4 rounds. The kuo-toan whois attached to his weapon by a stout cord, then tries to haul in itsvictim and slay him with a dagger thrust.Kuo-toan shields are made of special boiled leather and aretreated with a unique glue-like substance before a battle. Anyonewho attacks a kuo-toan from the front has a 25% chance of get¬ting his weapon stuck fast. The chance of the victim treeing theweapon is the same as his chance for opening doors.Hit probability for kuo-toa is the same as that of a human ofsimilar level, but males also gain a +1 bonus to both attack rollsand damage rolls when using a weapon, due to Strength, Whenfighting with a dagger only, kuo-toa can bite, which causesLd4 +1 points of damage.When two or more kuo-toan priests or priest/thieves operatetogether, they can generate a lightmng stroke by joining hands.The bolt is two feet wide and hits only one target unless by mis¬chance a second victim gets in the way, The bolt inflicts 6 points
of damage per priest, half that if a saving throw vs. spell is suc¬cessful. The chances of such a stroke occurring is 10% cumula¬tive per caster per round.The special defenses of these creatures include skin secretions,which gives attempts to grapple, grasp, tie, or web a kuo-toanonly a 25% chance of success. Despite their eyes being set on thesides of their heads, they have excellent independent monocularvision, with a 180-degree field of vision and the ability to spotmovement even though the subject is invisible, astral, or ethere¬al. Thus, by maintaining complete motionlessness, a subject canavoid detection. Kuo-toa also have 60-foot infravision and havethe ability to sense vibrations up to 10 yards away. They are sur¬prised only on a 1 on the IdlO surprise roll.Kuo-toa are totally immune to poison and are not affected byparalysis. Spells that generally affect only humanoid types haveno effect on them. Electrical attacks cause half damage, or none ifthe saving throw' is successful; magic missiles cause only 1 pointof damage; Illusions are useless against them. However, kuo-toahate bright light and suffer a -1 penalty to their attack roll in suchcircumstances as daylight or light spells. They suffer full damagefrom fire attacks and save with a -2 penalty against them.Sometimes kuo-toa are encountered in small bands journeyingin the upper world to kidnap humans for slaves and sacrifices.Such parties are sometimes also found in dungeon labyrinths thatconnect to the extensive system of underworld passages and ca¬verns that honeycomb the crust of the earth. Only far below thesurface of the earth can the intrepid explorer find the caverns inwhich the kuo-toa build their underground communities.Habitat Society: Kuo-toa spawn as do fish, and hatchlings, orfingerlings as they call their young, are raised in pools until theiramphibian qualities develop, about one year after hatching. Theyoung, now a foot or so high, are then able to breathe air andthey are raised in pens according to their sex and fitness. Thereare no families, as we know them, in kuo-toan society.Especially fit fingerlings, usually of noble spawning, are trainedfor the priesthood as priests, priest thieves, or special celibatemonks. The latter are called "monitors" whose role is to control thecommunity members who become violent or go insane. The moni¬tor is capable of attacking to subdue or kill. A monitor has 56 hitpoints, attacks as a 7th-!evel fighter and has the following additionalabilities; twice the normal movement rate, AC 1, and receives fourattacks per round—two barehanded for 2d4 points of damage (dou¬ble if trying to subdue) and two attacks with teeth for ld4 +■1 pointsof damage. One hand/bite attack occurs according to the initiativeroll, the other occurs at the end of the round.Subdued creatures cannot be larger than eight feet tall and 500pounds. Subduing attacks cause only half real damage, but whenthe points of damage inflicted equal the victim's total, the crea*ture is rendered unconscious for 3d4 rounds.Kuo-toan communities do not generally cooperate, thoughthey have special places of worship in common. These places areusually for intergroup trade, councils, and worship of the SeaMother, so they are open to all kuo-toa. These religious com¬munities, as well as other settlements, are open to draw and theirservants, for the dark elves provide useful goods and services,though the draw are both feared and hated by the kuo-toa. Thisleads to many minor skirmishes and frequent kidnappings be¬tween the peoples. The illithids {mind flayers) are greatly hatedby the kuo-toa and they and their allies are attacked on sight.The ancient kuo-toa once inhabited the shores and islands ofthe upper world, but as the race of mankind grew more numer¬ous and powerful, these men-fish were slowly driven to remoteregions. Continual warfare upon these evil, human-sacrifIcingcreatures threatened to exterminate the species, for a number ofpowerful beings were aiding mankind, their sworn enemies.Some kuo-toa sought refuge in sea cavems and secret subter¬ranean waters, and while their fellows were being slaughtered,these few prospered and developed new powers to adapt to theirlightless habitat. The seas contained other fierce and evil crea¬tures, however, and the deep-dwelling kuo-toa were eventuallywiped out, leaving only those in the underworld to carry on, un¬noticed and eventually forgotten by mankind. But the remainingkuo-toa have not forgotten mankind, and woe to any who fallinto their slimy dutches.Now the kuo-toa are haters of sunlight and are almost never en¬countered on the earths surface. This, and their inborn hatred ofdiscipline, prevent the resurgence of these creatures, for they havebecome numerous once again and acquired new powers. However,they have also become somewhat unstable, possibly as a result ofinbreeding, and insanity is common among the species.If a kuo-toan lair is founds it contains 4dl0 x 10 2nd4evelmales. In addition, there are higher level fighters in the same ra¬tio as noted for wandering groups. The leader of the group is oneof the following, depending on the lair's population:A priest /thief king of 12/24th level, if 350 or more normal kuo-toa are present, orA priest/thief prince of 11/13th level, if 275-349 normal kuo-toaare present, orA priest/thief duke of !0/12th level, if fewer Lhan 275 normalkuo-toa are presentThere are also the f ollowing additional kuo-toa in the lair;Eight Eyes of the priest leader—6th- to 8th-level priest/thievesTwo Whips of 4th/4th or 5th/5th level (see whip description!Young (noncombatant) equal to 20% of the total kuo-toaIn special religious areas there are also a number of kuo-toanpriests. For every 20 kuo-toa in the community there is a 3rd-level priest, for every 40 there is a 4th-levd priest, for every 80there is a Sthdevel priest, all in addition to the others. Thesepriests are headed by one of the following groups:One 6th-level priest if the group is 160 or fewer, or One 7th-leveland one 6th-levd priest if the group is between 161 and240, orOneBth-level, one 7th-level, and one 6th-level priest if the groupnumbers between 241 and 320, orOne 9th-level two 7th-leveb and three 6th-level priests if thegroup numbers between 321 and 400, orOne 10th-level ( two 8th-leve1, and four 6th-levd priests if thegroup numbers over 400Though kuo-toa prefer a diet of flesh, they also raise fields ofkelp and fungi to supplement their food supply. These fields, litby strange phosphorescent fungi, are tended by slaves, who arealso used for food and sacrifices.Kuo-toan treasures tend more toward pearls, gem-encrusteditems of a water motif, and mineral ores mined by their slaves.Any magical items in the possession of a kuo-toan are usuallyobtained from adventuring parties that never made it homeagain.Ecology: Not much is known to surface-dwelling sages aboutthis enigmatic, violent, subterranean race, but some of the moreastute scholars speculate that the kuo-toa are but one-third of thethree-way rivalry that includes mind flayers and drow. It is parti¬ally because of this continuing warfare that none of the threeraces has been able to achieve dominance of the surface world.Of all the hazards that the desert presents, few can compare withthe trad race of flesh-eating creatures known as lamias. Thesehalf-human, half-quadruped beast hybrids use deceit, speed, andspells to entrap the foolhardy adventurer who dares wander intotheir ruins.Their upper torsos* arms, and heads resemble those of beauti¬ful human women, while their lower bodies are those of beasts,such as goats, deer, or Hons, with the appropriate coloration.This hybrid configuration makes lamias very fast and powerful.They are usually armed with daggers, which they use to carve upthdr prey for the feast. Lamias sometimes smell like perfumeflowers, so as to attract unwary victims. They wear no clothingor jewelry. In communicating, they use the common tongue.Combat: A lamia is able to use the following spells once perday! charm person , mirror image, suggestion, and illusion (as awand). For purposes of duration, effect, etc, assume that the la¬mia casts its spells at 9thdevel spell ability. These spells are typi¬cally used to lure persons to the lamia and then hold them therefor the creature to devour at its leisure.The lamia s touch permanently drains 1 point of Wisdom froma victim, and when his Wisdom drops below 3. he willingly doeswhatever the lamia tells him do. These orders often involve hav¬ing the victim attack his compatriots while it continues whittlingdown their ranks. If it has a chance to drain the Wisdom of morethan one victim, it will certainly do so. It may even use its charmspell to supplement its control over party members.Among a lamia's favorite illusions to cast upon itself are thefollowing: a lovely damsel in distress* a tough but beautiful fe¬male ranger, or an elf maiden. At times, it simply may cast anillusion of a lost child in distress or a group of peasants beingattacked by a large beast, w'hile hiding itself, awaiting the rightmoment to attack from the rear.Habitat Society: Lamias dwell in ruined cities or caves, placessituated in desert or wasteland areas. These evil creatures are sol¬itary beasts, sustaining themselves on the flesh of those who walktoo dose to their territories. During lean times, they supplementtheir diet by stalking game animals. Lamias hardly ever venturemore than 10 miles from their lairs.Ecology; Lamias are legendary monsters that prey upon trav¬elers or guard hidden places or objects oi power. They are myste¬rious creatures that seem devoted to the spreading of chaos andevil in their dwelling places.These beings rule over the lamias and the wild, lonely areas theyinhabit They differ from the normal lamias in that the lamia no¬bles' lower bodies are those of giant serpents and their upperbodies can be either male or female. It is rumored that the normalfemale lamia is bom from the union of two nobles.The males wield short swords and have ld6 levels of wizardspells, plus the inherenl spells charm person, mirror image, sug¬gestion, and illusion. The females are unarmed and only attackwith magic: they are more experienced magically and have 2d4levels of wizard spells plus the usual inherent spells.Like normal lamia, lamia nobles have the Wisdom-drainingtouch,AH lamia nobles are able to assume human form. In this guisethey attempt to penetrate human society and wreak evil. Theyspeak all of the languages of humans and demihumans. When inhuman form, they are recognizable as lamias by humans anddemihumans only if the characters are of 7th level or higher, wi tha 5% cumulative chance per level above 6th. Priests and paladinsreceive an additional 15% chance (i.e.. a IQth-levd priest has a35% chance). Lamia nobles are given to outbursts of senselessviolence.The lammasu, a winged leonine figure with a human head, aidsand protects lawful good persons. They are generally kind andfriendly to all good creatures,Lammasu resemble golden-brown lions with ihe wings of ea¬gles and the heads of men with shaggy hair and beards. Theirformidable appearance is softened by their regal, compassionate,and beneficent expressions. They communicate in their owntongue, in common, and through a limited form of telepathy.Combat; Since lammasu are concerned for the welfare andsafety of good beings, they almost always enter combat if theysee good creatures being threatened, in the way least likely tocause harm to the good beings.Lammasu are able to become invisible or dimension door at will.They radiate a protechott from evil 10 1 radius (-2 penalty to ail evilattacks, +2 bonus to saving throws against evil attacks), Addition¬ally they are able to use priest spells up to 4th level, at 7th-levelproficiency, lammasu can employ four lst-level spells, three 2nd-level Spells, two 3rd-level spells, and one 4th-level spell. They havecure serious wounds (4d8 + 2) and cure critical wounds (,6d8 +6),and 10% of lammasu can speak a hoi y word as well.If all else fails, lammasu can attack with their two razor-sharpfront claws, inflicting ld6 points of damage each. If they chooseto swoop down from the sky on a target, this damage is doubled.Habitat/Society; The lammasu have a very structured and law-ful society, reflecting their alignment. They are organized inprides, just like lions. They dwell in old, abandoned temples situ-aLed in warm regions. These temples have not lost their consecra¬tion, and in some way the lammasu are the self-appointedresident guardians of these high and holy places. As a rule, onlyone pride of lammasu is ever found in a 25-rnile area; they spreadthemselves out so they can respond quickly to any evil outburst.Lammasu females fight as effectively as the males; for every'four lammasu encountered, one is a female. When found in theirlair, there are young equal to 25% of the adult population. Fe¬male lammasu have the heads of women, with long, hair.Once a month, the pride leaders gather together to consortabout how the war on evil goes. This grouping is called the Whi-temoon, since it takes place on the first night of the full moon.There are usually 6d6 lammasu and 2d4 greater lammasu, withthe latter presiding over the meeting* Such a gathering of lawfulgood causes the entire temple where they meet to glow in a purelight, until it breaks up at dawn. There is perhaps no safer placein all the world that night.Though they dwell in warm areas, they occasionally visit eve¬ry dime. They speak their own tongue as well as common. Attimes they use a limited form of telepathy.Good-aligned strangers are always well received. Neutrah arewatched carefully, but are treated politely unless the outsiders be¬gin causing trouble. Evil beings are firmly asked to leave, and ifthey fail to do so, they arc attacked by the pride. In case of trou¬ble, there ts a cumulative 10% chance per turn that a neighboringpride picks up a telepathic summons and come to help out theoriginal pride. Lammasu harbor an especially strong dislike forlamias and manticores. Some foolish people confuse lammasufor manticores, which does little to improve the lammasu dispo¬sition toward them.Ecology: Lammasu keep the wastelands from being completelyoverrun by evil creatures* Their aid to frontier settlements is be¬yond measurable value.These creatures are slightly larger than a lesser lammasu and one ortwo may be found dwelling with a pride of six or more lesser lamma¬su, Greater lammasu can travel the Astral and Ethereal Planes, be¬come invisible, teleport without error and dimension door, all atwill. They radiate protection from evil in a 20' radius M penalty toevil attacks and 44 bonus to saving throws! and have the curativepowers of their lesser cousins, Their priest spells consist of five 1st-level, four2nd-level, three3rd-level J two 4th-level, and one 5th-levelspell* Fifty percent of greater lammasu can speak a holy word aswell. They cast spells as 12th-level priests.Greater lammasu have empathy, telepathic communicationand speak their racial speech and the common tongue. Despitetheir greater stature, these lammasu are just as gentle and humbleas their lesser brethren.
Habitat Society: These creatures are found only in the watersof swamps and marshes. Giant leeches range from 1 to 4 Hit Dicein size? various sized creatures usually are found in a group.This leech is about one inch long and resembles an inconspicuoustwig. It is found m pools, lakes, and streams.Anyone drinking water containing a leech has a 10% chance oftaking it into his mouth unless the water is carefully filtered (suchas through a sheet of gauze) before drinking. The leech sucksblood at the rate of 1-3 points of damage per round, until it be¬comes completely distended. After ten rounds of sucking, theleech is bloated and will not suck any more blood.Each round that the leech is in the victim's throat, there is a50% chance that the victim chokes, causing an additional 1 d4points of damage. A victim who chokes on three successiverounds dies on the third round.Apart from magical means that may suggest themselves, theonly way to kill a throat leech in a victim's throat is to place athin, heated metal object, such as a wire, into the bloated leech;Giant leeches are horrid, slug-like creatures that dwell in wet,slimy areas and suck the blood of warm-blooded creatures.These disgusting parasites range from 2 to 5 feet long. Theirslimy skin is mottled brown and tan with an occasional shade ofgray. Two antennae protrude from atop the head.Combat: Leeches wait in the mud and slime for prey. The initialattack attaches the sucker mouth of the giant leech. On the nextround, and on each round thereafter it drains blood for 1 pointof damage per Hit Die of the leech. There is only a 1% chancethat the victim is aware of the attack if it occurs in the water. Theleech has anesthetizing saliva, and its bite and blood drain arenot usually felt until weakness (the loss of 50% of hit points) setsin and makes the victim aware that something is amiss.They can be killed by attack or by salt sprinkled on theirbodies. There is a 50% chance that the bite of one of these crea¬tures causes a disease that is fatal in ld4 +1 w r eeks unless cured.the hot metal causes the leech to burst and no further damage isinflicted on the victim.This is merely a massive swarm ol small leeches, found only inthe water. They move In a cloud 10 feet in diameter Anyonecaught in the swarm receives Id 10 points of damage per roundfrom blood drain. Area-effect attacks that Inflict 10 or morepoints of damage will disperse the swarm.
Leprechauns are diminutive folk who are found in fair, greenlands and enjoy frolicking, working magic, and causing harmlessmischief.Rumored to be a cross between a species of half ling and astrong strain of pixie, leprechauns are about 2 feet talk Theyhave pointed ears, and their noses also come to a tapered pointAbout 50% of all male leprechauns have beards. Pointed shoes,brown or green breeches, green or gray coats, and either wide-brimmed or stocking caps are the preferred dress of the wee folk.Many leprechauns also enjoy smoking a pipe, usually a long¬stemmed one*Combat: These fun-loving creatures of magical talent are bynature noncombative* They can become invisible at will, poly¬morph nonliving objects, create illusions (with full audio and ol¬factory effects), and use ventriloquism spells as often as they like.Their keen ears prevent them from ever being surprised. Beingfull of mischief, they often (75%) snatch valuable objects fromadventurers, turn invisible and dash away. There is a 75%chance that the attempt is successful. If pursued closely, there is a25% chance per turn of pursuit that the leprechaun drops thestolen goods. The chase never leads to the leprechaun's lair.If caught or discovered in its lair (10% chance), the leprechaunattempts to mislead his captor into believing that he is givingover his treasure while he actually is duping the captor. It re¬quires great care to actually obtain the leprechaun's treasure.Habitat Society: Leprechauns live in families of up to 20,though they call this unit a clan. They use first names and sur¬names, and it is fairly certain that these names are a good indica¬tor of which dan one is dealing with. A lair usually consists of awarm, dry cave with a hearth, rugs, and furniture* Strangely,word travels fast between clans of the same surname, and a clanthat a group of adventurers runs into may already know the ad¬venturers' names from another dan the party encountered sev¬eral days prior.There is a rumor that a King of the Leprechauns exists, butthere seems to be no official political hierarchy* There are nocommunities or villages of leprechauns.It is rare to see leprechaun offspring, but they do exist, bomwith the full magical powers of an adult. For every 10 adults en¬countered in a lair, one child wUl be found.Leprechauns enjoy eating the same sorts of foods that humansand demihumans eat, with a spedal fondness for wine. Thisweakness may be used to outwit them.Gold is the one treasure found in every leprechaun s hoard. Ifan intruder secures this treasure, a leprechaun will bargain andbeg to get it back. As a last desperate measure, he will grant theintruder three wishes (very limited), but only if the intruder givesover the treasure first. When this is done, the leprechaun will irt-deed grant the three wishes. After all three wishes, the lepre¬chaun will flatter the intruder and declare that the three wisheswere so well-phrased that he will give a fourth wish. If the fourthwish is pronounced, the leprechaun will cackle with glee, the re¬sults of all the wishes will be reversed, and the intruder plus hisgroup will be teleported (no saving throw) to a random location2620 miles away. No member of that party will never be able tofind that particular leprechaun again.Leprechauns are naturally distrustful toward humans anddwarves, since these races have greedy tendencies. They getalong well with elves, gnomes, and halflings.A leprechaun will not sit idly by while a helpless creature isattacked, since they have a soft spot for weaker creatures* In gen¬eral, if a leprechaun senses that a stranger means no harm, he canbe quite civil, but he will not bring visitors to his lair* If the lepre¬chaun finds someone hurt, he might take the victim to his lair,but only after making sure that the stranger is not followed andcannot see where he is being taken.Ecology: The best times and places to observe leprechauns arecalled borderlines. Dawn and dusk (which are neither all lightnor dark), the shore (which is neither all earth nor all water), orthe equinoxes and solstices (which are neither one season nor an¬other), are the best times and places to see leprechauns and theirilk frolicking and celebrating.
The leucrotta is a creature of ugly appearance and temperamentthat haunts deserted places in search of prey.The average Leucrotta stands 7 feet tall at the shoulder and canreach a length of 9 feet in its mature form. The body of the leu¬crotta resembles that of a stag, with a leonine tufted tail and clov¬en hooves. Its head resembles that of a huge badger, but insteadof teeth it has sharp, jagged bony ridges. Its body is tan, with theneck gradually darkening until it turns black at the head. The so-called teeth are sickly gray, and its eyes glow with a feral redlight. The smell of animals, decomposing on a hot humid dayfollows the leucrotta, and its breath is especially bad.Combat: This monster is very sly and can imitate a range ofnoises and voices, the most common ones being a man, a wom¬an. a child, or domestic animals in pain. It uses these noises inorder to trick its prey into approaching within attack distance. Ithunts humans, demihumans, humanoids, and even other animalpredators, Leucrotta are intelligent and can speak their own lan¬guage as well as the common tongue,Leucrotta attack by biting for 3d6 points of damage. It is ru¬mored that their bony ridges and jaws are so powerful that theycan even bite through metal. If a leucrotta scores a hit againstsomeone with a shield or armor, the target must roll a savingthrow vs. crushing blow for the shield. If the roll fails, then inaddition to scoring the regular damage, the beast managed to al¬so bite through the shield. Once the shield is gone, the armormust go through the same routine with subsequent successfulbites.Once an opponent is rendered helpless, a leucrotta will leaveits prize and attack any other intruders if the melee is still goingon. It will give chase to an enemy, but will never pursue beyondsight of any prey it has managed to already capture.When a leucrotta retreats, it turns its back on its opponent andkicks with its hind legs, causing ld6 points of damage with eachhoof.Note to trackers: It is almost impossible to identify leucrottatracks, since they look exactly like a stag's.Habitat Society: This ugly creature haunts deserted and deso¬late places because most other creatures cannot bear the sight ofit. Its ugliness is legendary. Leucrotta lair in treacherous ravinesand rocky spires, because they are as surefooted as a mountaingoat. Caves, old abandoned towers, or a hollowed out deadfallare the preferred lairs for this disgusting beast.For every four leucrotta found in a lair, there is a 10% chancethat an extra one, an immature leucrotta of half strength, is alsopresent. Leucrotta are not a very family oriented species, as theirnasty tempers extend sometimes to each other. The beasts rangeover a 20-mile area.Since the leucrotta is not a very social creature, all strangersare nothing more than sources of food. Sometimes, a powerfulchaotic evil person may entrap a leucrotta and force it to serve asa guardian, but such beasts rebel at the first opportunity.Those brave enough to venture into a leucrotta lair must firstroll a successful saving throw vs. poison wnth a -I penalty, due tothe horrendous stench, or gag helplessly for ld4 rounds. Onceinside, the money and possessions of past victims await.Though the leucrotta prefer freshly killed meat, they are notabove eating carrion. This serves to enhance their already badreputation.Ecology: Leucrotta distance themselves from the grand pictureof nature, preferring to lurk on the fringes. They serve no practi¬cal use and one would be hard pressed to find a druid that wouldtry to protect a member of this species. Some sages speculate thatthe leucrotta is an unnatural abnormality, an aberration spawnedby some demented power or archmage.Still some mages prize the leucrotta hide for creating boots ofstriding and springing* hoping that the surefootedness of thebeast passes down to the boots themselves. There are rumors thatleucrotta saliva is an effective antidote to love philters, but so farthere have been no volunteers to test this theory.
Hie lich is, perhaps, the single most powerful form of undead knownto exist. They seek to further their own power at all costs and havelittle or no interest in the affairs of the living, except where those af¬fairs interfere with their own,A lich greatly resembles a wight or mummy, being gaunt and skele¬tal in form The creature's eye sockets are black and empty save forthe fierce pinpoints of light which serve the lich as eyes. The lich cansee with normal vision in even the darkest of environments but Isunaffected by even the brightest light. An aura of cold and darknessradiates from the lich which makes it an ominous and fearsome sight.They were originally wizards of at least 18th level.Lichee are often (75%) garbed in the rich clothes of nobility, if notso attired, the lich will be found in the robes of its former profession.In either case, the clothes will be tattered and rotting with a 25%chance of being magical in some way.Combat; Although a lich will seldom engage in actual melee com¬bat with those it considers enemies, it is more than capable of holdingits own when forced into battle.The aura of magical power which surrounds a lich is so potent thatany creature of fewer than 5 Hit Dice (or 5th level) which sees it mustsave vs. spell or flee in terror tor 5-20 I5d4) rounds.Should the lich elect to touch a living creature, its aura of absolutecold will inflict 1-10 points of damage. Further the victim must savevs. paralysis or be utterly unable to move, This paralysis lasts untildispelled in some manner.Liches can themselves be hit only by weapons of at least +1, bymagical spells, or by monsters with 6 or more Hit Dice and/or magi¬cal properties. The magical nature ol the Hch and its undead statemake it utterly immune to charm sleep, enfeehlement, polymorph,cold . electricity, insanity, or deaffo spelts. Priests of at least 8th levelcan attempt to turn a lich, as can paladins of no less than IQlh level,A lich is able to employ spells just as it did in life. It still requiresthe use of Its spell books, magical components, and similar objects. Itis important to note that most, if not all liches have had a great dealof time in which to research and create new magical spells and ob¬jects, Thus, adventurers should be prepared to face magic the likes ofwhich they have never seen before when stalking a lich. In addition,liches are able to use any magical objects which they might possessJust as if they were still alive.Defeating a lich in combat is difficult indeed, but managing to ac¬tually destroy the creature is harder still , in all cases, a lich will pro¬tect itself from annihilation with the creation of a phylactery inwhich it stores its life force. This is similar to a tnugtC jar spell. Inorder to ensure the final destruction of a lich, its body must be whollyannihilated and its phylactery must be sought out and destroyed insome manner. Since the lich will always take great care to see to itthat its phylactery is well hidden and protected this can be an under¬taking fully as daunting as the defeat of the lich in its physical form.Habitat/Society: Liches are usually solitary creatures. They havecast aside their places as living beings by choice and now want aslittle to do with the world of men as possible. From time to time,however a lichs interest in the world at large may be reawakened bysome great event of personal importance,A lich will make its home in some ominous fortified area, often astrong keep or vast subterranean crypt.When a Lich does decide to become involved with the world be¬yond its lair, its keen intelligence makes it a dangerous adversary. Insome cases, a lich will depend on its magical powers to accomplish itsgoals, if this is not sufficient, however, the lich is quite capable ofanimating a force of undead troops to act on its behalf. If such is thecase, the lich s endless patience and cunning more than make up forthe inherent disadvantages of the lesser forms of undead which itcommands.Although the lich has no interest in good or evil as we understandit. the creature will do whatever it must to further its own causes.Since it feels that the living are of little importance, the lich is oftenviewed as evil by those who encounter it. In rare cases, liches of amost unusual nature can be found which are of any alignment.The lich can exist for centuries without change. Its will drives itonw ard to master new magics and harness mystical powers not avail¬able to it in its previous life. So obsessed does the monster becomewith its quest for power that it often forgets its former existence utter¬ly. Few liches call themselves by their old names when the years havedrained the last vestiges of their humanity from them. Instead, theyoften adopt pseudonyms like The Black Hand' or the ForgottenKing." Learning the true name at a lich is rumored to confer powerover the creature.Ecology: The lich is not a thing of this world. Although it was once aliving creature, it has entered into an unnatural existence.In order to became a lich, the wizard must prepare its phylacteryby the use of the enchant an item . magic jar, permanency and reincar¬nation spells The phylactery which can be almost any manner ofobject, must be of the finest craftsmanship and materials with a valueof not less than 1,500 gold pieces per level of the wizard. Once thisobject is created, the would-be lich must craft a potion of extremetoxicity, which is then enchanted with the following spells:wraithferm, permanency, cone of cold , feign death, and animatedead. When next the moon is full, the potion is imbibed. Rather thandeath, the potion causes the wizard to undergo a transformation intoIts new state. A system shock survival throw is required, w ith failureindicating an error in the creation of the potion which kills the wizardand renders him forever dead,The demilich is not, as the name implies, a weaker form of the lich.Rather, it is the stage into which a lich will eventually evolve as thepower ivhich has sustained its physical form gradually begins to fail.In most cases, all that remains of a demilich's body are a skull, somebones, and a pile of dust.When il has learned all that it feels it can in its undead life, the lichwill continue its quest for power in strange planes unknown to eventhe wisest of sages. Since il has no use for its physical body at thispoint, the lich leaves il to decay as it should have done centuries ago.If ihe final resting place of a demilich s remains are entered, thedust which was once its body will rise up and assume a man-likeshape. In the case of the oldest demiliches {25%}, the shape will ad¬vance and threaten, but dissipate without attacking in 3 rounds un¬less attacked. Younger demiliche* 175%) still retain a link to theirremains, however, and will form with the powers of a wraith. Thisdust form cannot be turned, In addition, it can store energy fromattacks and use this power to engage its toes. If the dust form is at¬tacked. each point of damage which is delivered to it is converted toan energy point. Since the demilich will fall back and seem to sufferinjury from each attack (though none is actually inflicted), its attack¬ers are likely to press on in their attempts to destroy it. Once the de¬milich has acquired 50 energy points, it will assume a manifestationwhich looks much like the lichs earlier undead form and has thepowers and abilities of a ghost, but which cannot be turned.If anyone touches the skull it will rise into the air and turn to facethe most powerful of the intruders (a spell user will be chosen over anon-spell user). Instantly, it unleashes a howl which acts as a deathray, affecting all creatures within a 2(T radius of the skull. Those whofail to save vs. death are permanently dead.On (he next round, the demilich will employ another manner ofattack. In order to attain the status of a detnilich, a lich must havereplaced 5-5 i ld4 + 4) of its teeth with gems, Each of these gems nowserves as a powerful magical device which can tmp the soul of itsadversaries. The physical body of someone hit with the demilichsspell collapses and rots away in a single round. Once it has drainedthe life essence from the most powerf ul member of the party the skullsinks back to the floor. If it continues to be challenged, the demilichcan repeal this attack until all of its gems are filled. An amulet of lifeprotection will prevail over the gem, but the character s body willperish regardless.In addition to the attacks mentioned above, a demilich can alsopronounce a powerful curse on those who disturb it. These can be somighty as to include: always being hit by one s enemies, never mak¬ing a saving throw, or the inability to acquire new experience points.Demilich curses can be overcome with a remove curse, but the victimloses one point of charisma permanently when the curse js removed.The skull of a demilich is Armor Gass ^6 and has 50 hit points. It carsbe affected by spells in only a few ways: a forget spell will cause it to sinkdown without attacking (either by hoivling or draining a soulf a dispelevil will do 5-S (ld4 + 4) points of damage to it, a shatter spell will inflict5T6 (3d6) points of damage to it, a holy word pronounced against ir willdeliver 5-30 (5db) points of damage, and a power word kill spell cast byan ethereal or astral wizard will cause the skull to shatter (destroying it).Most weapons will be unable to harm the skull of a demilich, butthere are exceptions. A fighter or ranger with a vorpal sword, swordof sharpness, sword +5, or vorpal weapon can inflict normal dam¬age on the skull, as can a paladin with a vorpal or +4 weapon. Fur¬ther, any character with a +4 or better weapon or a mace ofdisruption can inflict 1 point of damage to the skull each time hestrikes it.Upon the destruction of the skull, those who have been trappedinside the gems must make a saving throw vs. spell. Those who failare lost forever, having been consumed by the demilich to power itsmagical nature, If the character survives, the gem glows with a faintinner light, and true seeing will reveal a tiny figure trapped within. Ifthe throw is made the soul can be freed by simply crushing the gem.A new body must be within 10 yards for the soul to enter or It will belost. Such a body might be a clone or simulacrum. (See spells ol thosenames.)If the fragments of the destroyed skull are not destroyed by immer¬sion in holy water and the casting of a magic the demilich willFrom time to time, sages have heard rumors of liches having alignmentsother than evil, and even lawful good liches apparently have existed.There have even been reports of priests who, in extreme circumstances,have become liches. These reports have recently been verified, but thearchlich is as rare as Rocs teeth.
Living walls appear to be normal walls of stone or brick, al¬though they radiate both evil and magic if detected. Infravisionwill not detect any peculiar patterns. However, a character whocasts a true seeing spell or who peers through a gem of seeing willsee past the illusion: the wall actually consists of greying and sin¬ewy flesh—of faces, hands, broken bones, feet, and toes juttingfrom the surface. Characters within 5 yards of the wall can hearlow moans of horror, pain, and sorrow issuing from it. Even if asilence spell is cast, the moans still rise.A living wall contains the melded bodies of humanoids andmonsters who died within 100 yards of the wall since its cr Aion.Those who die lighting a Living wall are absorbed into it ur ac¬tually strengthen it. Characters and monsters capture*! tv thewall retain all the abilities they had in life: as p* r f the v.a>\they become chaotic evil and fight any creature erut approachesit to the best of their abilities.It a wizard becomes melded with a living wall, his spellcastingabilities are retained and can immediately be used for attacks.The wizard retains any spells that were memorized at the time hewas absorbed into the wall: these are renewed each day. If a war¬rior loses his life in combat with a living wall, his fighting abilitiesand his weapons come under control of the beast: the weaponsare hidden within the wall until the wall attacks, then are pushedthrough the mass of graying flesh to the surface. A hand attachesitsell to the weapon, and eyes jutting from the wall guide the at¬tack of the weapon. If the wall absorbs characters with rangedweapons, the weapons become useless once arrows, quarrels, orother necessary projectiles are expended.Combat: A living wall never initiates combat, except against itscreator, whom it despises. When such a w r all is attacked, everycreature lhaL is part of the wall returns one attack, per strikeagainst the wall. If a wall is made up of 12 creatures and onecreature lands a blow on the wall, the attacker is subject to adozen return blows from the wall.All creatures in the wall fight according to their normal attackmodes, These attacks can be magical, physical, or mental in ori¬gin. The type of attack and its damage often depend upon who orwhat is melded into the wall.If a 10th-level fighter and a 6th-Ievd fighter are absorbed intothe wall, the wall attacks as one 6th-levd fighter and one 10th-level fighter. For every mage or priest absorbed, the wall gainsspell attacks. The only spells that can be used, however, are thosethat the mage or priest had memorized (and had material compo¬nents for) at the time of absorption. Each of these spells may becast once per day. The material components of the spells are notconsumed. If one absorbed mage has three fireball spells memo¬rized and a second mage has one fireball in memory, the livingwall can attack with four fireballs per day, If the wall assimilatesa paladin or a lawful good priest, ail his special powers are re¬versed (e.g., detect good rather than detect evil, harm by layingof hands rather than heal r etc*)*Magical items absorbed with characters grant the wall theirspell effects, though items that grant AC improvements are lesseffective because of the wall's size. The wall gains 1 point im¬provement in Armor Class for every 3 points of magical im¬provement to AC. Thus, a ring of protection +3 lowers thewall's AC by I,When a character is absorbed, his hit points, at full health, areadded to the wall's base hit point total of 64.Nonmagical armor, packs, and purses are lost by absorbedcharacters. The piles of loot at the base of the wall often attractsbystanders, bringing them close enough to be seized by one of thewall's hands.Though a living wall will not initiate an attack, characters whocome within, 2 feet of the wall may be weakly grabbed by itsmany beseeching hands, tugging at them and imploring them fordeliverance. (Any character, regardless of Strength, may breakthe hold, ). Sometimes PCs who hear voices imploring, ' Help me!pull me free, help me!" grope about until they grab a hand. In thiscase, the character must roll a save vs. spell or become absorbed.If another character is holding onto the first character, he mustalso roll a saving throw vs, spell or become absorbed into thewall If the save vs. spell succeeds, the character is able to breakfree. A character who views the absorption of any creature intol he wail must make a horror check.Once absorbed, characters are lost forever. A wish spell,worded carefully, can remove one or more trapped characters,Pas$watl spells do not allow individuals to go through a livingwall. Characters must either cut through or blast through usingmagic. This, however, allows the wall to return attacks. Whencutting or blasting though the living wall the stench that risesfrom the exposed underflesh is nauseating and horrifying. A sav¬ing throw vs. poison is required to avoid passing out from thesmell. A successful saving throw indicates the character is onlynauseated,Living walls are immune to all planar and temporal spells-.Speak with dead, ESP and similar spells reveal a cacophony oftortured minds and voices. The caster learns nothing and mustmake a horror check*Habitat Society: Living walls never reproduce and always re¬main active until they are killed. Living walls encountered in thelairs of malevolent creatures often serve as part of a torturechamber, or to cover the true openings to secret passageways orcorridors.No one knows whether these monstrosities are limited in sizeor longevity. Walls as large as 15 feet high, 30 feet long, and 10feet thick have been reported. Living walls do> however, seem tobe limited to one section of wall. Thus, a cemetery or castle couldnot be surrounded by one large living wall.Nor can a wall section spread beyond Itself: a house with aliving wall in its basement will not slowly become a living house*The wall desires, above all else, to slay the creature who cre¬ated it. If it does so, or the creature meets its end within 100 yardsof the wall, the corpse of the hated creator is assimilated and thebeings trapped in the wall are freed to return to the peace ofdeath. The wall reverts to being a structure of stone, with thecorpse of its creator entombed within.Ecology: Chaotic evil mages occasionally create these monoliths.The exact method is unknown, but several years of preparationand spelleasling are required. A minimum of three corpses arenecessary for the spells.A fact known only to one or two inhabitants of Ravenloft, isthat living walls also arise as rare manifestations of Ravenloffspower, as responses to despair and dread. These walls are bom incurses, midwived by death, and nursed on massacre.The seed for such a living wall is planted when one sapientcreature willfully entombs another in a wall. The hapless victimmay be bound and walled alive in a rock niche on a windsweptmountain trail, a sill in a fetid catacomb, a corner in an asylum, acave wall a mausoleum facade, or any other stone or brick walkOnce entombed, the victim will suffocate, dehydrate, or starve inutter darkness and solitude. But even this agony is not sufficientto wake the land's attention—the entombed creature, in his ter¬ror, must curse his slayer, screaming loudly enough for his voiceto carry beyond his tomb of stone. Only then does the land hearhis agony.When the victim dies, his life force is trapped within the wall.As he struggles to escape, his life energy becomes soiled by thesoot of his screams and curses, which thickly coat the inside ofhis stone sarcophagus. In a matter of days, madness corrupts thetrapped life force, changing it to chaotic evil.At this point, the bodies of any creatures that have died within100 yards of the wall within the last month rise, shamble to thewall, and meld into it. Even corpses that have been buried willdig their way to the surface and converge upon the wall. Al¬though the wall retains its previous appearance, it is no longerstone, but a gray and rotting bulwark of limbs, ribs, hands*bones, and faces, twisted and fused together Bodies of any sub¬sequent deaths occurring within 100 yards also rise and wanderto the wall for assimilation.Most cultures, and all good-aligned characters, attempt to de¬stroy these creations wherever they are found. But many of theseassaults merely strengthen the wall with deposits of morecorpses.
Fire lizards resemble wingless red dragons and are sometimes called "falsedragons.' They are gray-colored with mottled red and brown back and red¬dish undereidts, Hatchlings are light gray in color and darken as they age.Combat: Fire lizards attack with a combination of raking claws andbite. They can simultaneously breathe a fiery cone 5 feet wide at themouth, 10 feet wide at the end, and 15 feet long which inflicts 1-12 pointsof fire-based damage "half if saving throw vs, breath weapon Is made).Fire lizards are immune to fire-based attacks.Habitat Society: Fire lizards prefer subterranean lairs but come out eve¬ry fortnight to hunt fresh game. Prey is hauled back to the lair for a lei¬surely meal; the debris forms the treasure trove. Fire lizards are slowmoving and sleep 50% of the time. Their lairs may have 1-4 eggs (10%chance, market value 5,000 gp eachi Hatchlings immediately leave tohunt on their own. Shiny objects attract fire lizards: gems and metalsform the bulk of treasure found in their dens.Ecology: Fire lizards are perhaps an ancestral dragon type or offshootof a common ancestor Real dragons avoid these 'False dragons," whichlive to be 50-100 years old. Fire lizard eggs are worth 5,000 gp, hatchlings7300 gp.This lizard is relatively normal, albeit targe, and lives in marshes andswamps. An attack score of 20 means the giant lizard s victim is trappedin the mouth and suffers double damage (2-16 points}. The giant lizardinflicts 2-16 points of damage each round thereafter. Giant lizards are la¬zy hunters and tend to attack anything edible that wanders by. Whiletheir great size protects them from most predators, it renders them asumptuous feast to the black dragons who share their swamps. Giant liz¬ards are sometimes domesticated by lizard men, who use them asmounts, beasts of burden, and food. Their lairs may be home to a widerange of lizards, from eggs to century-old adults.This huge, aggressive lizard derives its name from its horns. While thesehorns look like those of a minotaur, the males horns are not used incombat—rather, they are believed to be a means of attracting a mate. Thermnotaur lizard attacks with sharp daws and teeth. They are adept at am¬bushes; others are -5 on their surprise rail. An attack roll of 20 means thelizard has trapped its victim within its jaws andean automatically inflict 3-18points of damage each round thereafter until the victim escapes or dies. Thevictim is unable to attack the following round Minotaur lizards are found intropical hilts and mountains near copper and red dragons.This aggressive lizard is able to run across walls or ceilings with the helpof its suction cup-tipped feet An attack roll of 20 means the lizard hasdamped its jaws on its victim and does double damage E4-24 points). Thevictim automatically suffers an additional 2-12 points of damage eachround thereafter. These lizards never leave their caves voluntarily. Somespecies are albino; these shun light and attack at -1 in daylight or itsequivalent. Other species have tongues up to 20 feet long, Any man-sizedor smaller prey seized by the tongue will be drawn into the mouth andbitten the next round unless a bertd bars roll is made.
Tropical, sub¬tropical andtemperate swampVery rareTribalAnySpecialLizard men are savage, semi-aquatic, reptilian humanoids thatjive through scavenging, raiding, and, in less hostile areas, byfishing and gathering.Adult lizard men stand 6 to 7 feet tall, weighing 200 to 250pounds. Skin tones range from dark green to gray to brown, andtheir scales give them a flecked appearance. Their tails average 3to 4 feet long and are not prehensile. Males are nearly impossibleto distinguish from females without close Inspection, Lizard mangarb is limited to strings of bones and other barbaric ornament.Lizard men speak their own language.Combat: In combat, lizard men fight as unorganized individ¬uals. If they have equality or an advantage over their opponents,they tend toward frontal assaults and massed rushes. When out¬numbered, overmatched, or on their home ground, however,they become wily and ferocious opponents. Snares, sudden am¬bushes, and spoiling raids are favored tactics in these situations.While individually savage in melee, lizard men tend to be dis¬tracted bv food (such a& slain opponents) and by simple trea¬sures which may allow some of their quarry to escape. Theyoccasionally take prisoners as slaves, for food, or to sacrifice inobscure tribal rites.For every 10 lizard men encountered , there will be one patrol lead¬er with maximum hit points f 17 hp) and a 50% chance for a shamanwith 3 Hit Dice and the abilities of a 3rd-Ievel priest. If one or moretribes are encountered, each tribe will also have a war leader oi 6 HitDice, two subleaders with 4 Hit Dice, and a shaman of either 4 or 5Hit Dice (50% chance of each). Any group of two or more tribes hasa 50% chance for an additional shaman of 7 Hit Dice, Furthermore,each such group has a cumulative 10% chance per tribe to be led bya lizard king. If a lizard king is present, a shaman of 7 Hit Dice willalways be present, and all patrol leaders from each tribe (i.e, r 10%of the male warriors) will be combined into a single fanatical body¬guard for the lizard king.Habilat/Sariety: Lizard men are typically found in swamps,marshes, and similar places, often (35%) dwelling totally under¬water in air-filled caves. A tribe rarely numbers more than 150individuals, including females and hatchlings. It is not uncom¬mon for several tribes in an area to forge an informal allianceagainst outsiders, including other lizard man tribes.Lizard men are omnivorous, but are likely to prefer humanflesh to other foods, In this regard they have been known to am¬bush humans, gather up the corpses and capture the survivors,and take the lot back to their lair for a rude and horrid feast.Ecology: Lizard men have few natural enemies. They prey onhuman, demihuman, or humanoid settlements if these are near¬by, Lizard man eggs are bitter and inedible, as is their flesh, buttheir skin is sometimes worked as scale armor (Armor Gass 6).Lizard men produce no art, artifacts, or trade goods.About 1 tribe in 10 has evolved to a higher state. These lizardmen dwell in crude huts, use shields (thus Armor Class 4) andhurl barbed darts (30 yard range, i-4 points damage) or javelins(1-6 points damage) before closing with the enemy. These lizardmen use clubs (treat as morning stars, 2-6 points damage), andthe leaders may use captured swords or other weaponry. Thechance of these advanced lizard men having a lizard king is dou¬bled, Le, r 20% cumulative chance per tribe.A lizard king is a lizard man of above average height and Intelli¬gence, leading one or more loosely organized tribes of lizard men.The lizard king is most often armed with a great trident, w r hich itwields with great skill and ferocity. In the hands of the lizard king,the weapon inflicts 5-20 (3d6 + 2) points of damage, If the attack rollis 5 or more greater than the score needed to hit, the lizard king in¬flicts double damage (with a minimum of 15 points),A lizard king usually demands two humans each week. If nohumans are available, demihumans and other humanoids will besought. If none are available, two of the lizard king's bodyguardswill be killed and eaten instead.
The locathah are a humanoid race of aquatic nomads that roamsA typical locathah stands 5 to 6 leet tall and weighs 150 to 200pounds. The skirt is covered in fine but tough scales. The scalesvary in color from a ivory yellow on the stomach and neck to apale yellow on the rest of the body. The fins of their ears andspine are ocher. The ear fins enhance hearing while the large eyesare designed to enhance underwater vision. The only way to dis¬tinguish males from females is a vertical ocher stripe marking theegg sac. On the surface, locathah have a typically fish-like smell.They speak their own language; 10% also speak merman, koalin-Combat: The intelligent locathah have developed tactics thatenable them to beat their deadlier rivals. They always operate inteams, the larger the better. Furthermore, when away from theirhomes they ride giant eels that act as both mounts and allies.Since a locathah lacks claws or teeth, it cannot do damage if it isdisarmed. If that happens, it will either grapple a foe (if armedlocathah are present), look for weapons, or flee, locathah onlybattle to the death if cornered or if their home is threatened,Habitat Society: Locathah have developed a society similar tothat of surface humans* They have a well-developed hunter-gatherer society and a strong sense of territory, Locathah maketheir lairs in rocks carved into castle-like strongholds. Theseaquatic castles are very similar to their surface counterparts.Openings are protected by stout doors, shutters, or coral bars.Often 4d4 moray eels are used as guardbeasts. There is a 50%chance that Portuguese man-o-war jellyfish may be used as traps.A herd of giant eels is kept at the edge of each stronghold.Locathah have a communal society organized in tribes of 20 toseveral hundred. Each band of forty locathah has a leader (18 hitpoints, treat as a 4th-level fighteri and four assistants (14 hitpoints, treat as 3rd-level fighters). Clans of more than 120 loca¬thah are led by a female chieftain (22 hit points, treat as a 5th-level fighter) accompanied by 12 guards (12-14 hit points, treat as3rd-level fighters).Clan chieftains are prolific egg layers. Eggs are gathered intowell-guarded nurseries where they hatch after five to six months.Hatchlings are raised communally but each is assigned a "par¬ent, a nonwarrior adult that takes personal responsibility forthat hatchling.Locathah shamans are priests of up to the 3rd level.Ecology: Locathah are omnivorous. They have both aquaticfarmers and hunter-gatherers that provide a varied diet for theirclan brethren. The locathahs stone-age technology is limited tomanufacturing weapons, tools, and ornaments from availablematerials. More advanced or magical items are scavenged fromsunken wrecks, invaders, and drowning victims. Although theydefend their territories against hostile invaders, locathah cooper¬ate with nonhostile visitors, especially traders. Locathan coralcarvings and jewelry are highly valued by art collectors and aretraded for forged metals, ceramics, and durable magical items.Locathah can be hired to assist travelers in their realm. They alsocollect tolls from fishermen using locathah territorial waters,Locathah never voluntarily leave the water. They are almosthelpless on land. They are limited to slow crawls because theyare unused to supporting their own weight. The use of magic tofly or levitate will negate this helplessness. They risk swift suffo¬cation as their gills dry out; after ten turns, a surfaced locathahsuffers 1 point of damage each round. If the locathah immersesitself in water, the damage is halted.Locathah always try to recover captive locathah or theirbodies. If such are detected aboard a ship, other locathah mightfirst demand the return of their kin or simply sink the boat bycarving into its bottom.
The lurker is a carnivorous scavenger found only in subterraneansettings, It resembles a large manta ray; its grayish belly is tex¬tured like stone. The lurker typically attaches itself to a ceiling,where it is very difficult to detect (only 10% chance) unless actu¬ally prodded.Combat; Lurkers are slow-moving creatures that must wait fortheir prey to come into range. Lurkers wait on the ceiling, thendrop and wrap themselves around their prey. Lurkers cause a -4penalty to opponents' surprise rolls. The constriction causes ld6points of damage per round and suffocation within Id4 + 1rounds, regardless of the damage suffered by the victim. Thisdamage is automatic each round unless the victim breaks free orthe lurker dies. Lurker* do not stop attacking until dead. Preycan only fight with short weapons that were in hand when thelurker attacked,Habitat.Society: Lurkers are solitary creatures. The femaleslays eggs in a glutinous dutch near the ceiling. The hatchlings fallto the ground and feed on vermin untit they become large enoughto fly. Young resemble rectangular patches of moss.Ecology; Lurkers are opportunistic feeders that make do withwhatever wanders bv. The lurker flies by means of gases gener¬ated into sacs. These gases may be used in the preparation of apotion of levitation. Lurker eggs or hatchlings may be sold asliving defenses for those who want them. Lurker, trapper, andminer eggs can all be sold for 900 gp. hatchlings for 1,100 gp.The subterranean trapper is found only in caves and other darkplaces. It can alter its shape and color to resemble the local floorand to form a protuberance in the center that resembles a box, Atrapper is difficult to detect (95%) once it has settled into a dis¬guise. When prey wanders into the trapper's center, the creature sedges rise up and wrap around the victim. The victim suffersdamage per round equal to 4 points plus his Armor Class (a vie*tim with AC 2 suffers 6 points of damage per round). The con¬striction prevents breathing; victims smother in six roundsregardless of the damage suffered. A trapper does not release avictim unless the trapper is reduced to 1 hit point or killed.Trappers are immune to heat- or cold-based attacks. Trappersremain wrapped in a ball for IdS hours while digesting a victim.The remains of their victims are excreted below and form thetrappers treasure troves. A typical trapper can cover about 400square feet, while large ones can cover up to 600 square feet.Eggs are laid in a pebble-like mass. Hatchlings resemble flatrocks. Trapper skin may be used to make nonmagical +1 leatherarmor.The forest trapper, or miner, resembles a tailless manta ray mot¬tled brown or green-brown. Its frontal and dorsal ridges are hardbone.It preys primarily on small forest animals but traps larger crea¬tures by burrowing beneath paths or roads, then extending theld20+5 poisonous, twig-like barbs on its back through the surface.Passers-by have a 25% chance (75% if surprised) of unknowinglystepping on one. If not surprised, druids or rangers have a S%chance per level of spotting and identifying the barbs. Victims mustroll successful saving throws vs. poison or be paralyzed for 2d20turns. A miner wiU not surface until all surface movement stops.Then it attacks in the same manner as a subterranean trapper,Miners travel slowly on the surface by rippling like a snake.Burrowing is faster but travel is limited to soil, sand, and gravel.Because a miner is always underground unless attacking, it israrely attacked. The miner's toxin is located in sacs at the base ofthe barbs. The toxic barbs can be used in a blowgun or as a handweapon by small creatures, provided the grip is wrapped.Eggs are laid in a clutch several feet below the surface. Theyoung feed on burrowing animals for their first year.
Lycanthropes are humans who can transform themselves to re¬semble normal animals or monsters. The term ‘lycanthrope'' isactually a misnomer, coming from the roots lycos (wolf), and at i-thropos (manl A more correct term is "therianthrope,' from f/ie-rios (animal I and autfiropos, However. since werewolves are themost common therianthropes, the term lycanthrope has gainedmuch more popularity and more common usage.To further confuse the issue, there are creatures like thewolfwere and jackalwere, animals which can assume humanform. These creatures Cantherions" for lack of a better term)pass on their condition genetically (that is. by having offspring),not by biting and infecting other creatures. Other differences be¬tween the tivo classes of creature include their vulnerabilities: an-therions can be struck by cold iron, lycanthropes by silver,Antherions hate lycanthropes, and always attack their counter¬parts (wolfweres attack werewolves, etc.), likewise, most lycan¬thropes feel enmity for antherions, and attack on sight as well.In addition, there are many subspecies of some lycanthropes,beyond the differences in animal type. For instance, there arethree distinct subspecies of werewolf, differing in their secondaryform: one has fangs, a furred body a tail, wolf-like legs, and lu¬pine features (but without the snout); another has a very wolf-hke face and body with human hands, and is easily mistaken fora wolf when down on all fours; and the third secondary form isthat of a huge wolf, as big as a bear.The condition of being a lycanthrope, often referred to as acurse, is called lycanthropy. A distinction must be made betweentrue lycanthropes and infected lycanthropes. True lycanthropesare those to whom lycanthropy is a genetic trait: they breed withother lycanthropes and produce baby lycanthropes. Only truelycanthropes can infect others with lycanthropy. Infected lycan¬thropes are those w-hose lycanthropy results from being wound¬ed by a true lycanthrope.There are also creatures known by some as induced lycan¬thropes.' whose shape changes are effected by magical items;these creatures cannot infect others with lycanthropy though themagical items can be transferred to new owners. Some of theitems are cursed, so that once they are worn, they cannot be re¬moved without the application of a remove curse spell Inducedlycanthropes include swanmays and anyone using a c/onk of themanta ray.Finally, there are ‘cursed lycanthropes" created by a certainspell curse of lycanthropy (see boxed text).True lycanthropes and induced lycanthropes seldom hate their"curse" They see themselves as being like any other creature,with the same right to survival Those bitten and infected, orthose affected by the curse of lycanthropy spell are generally un¬happy with their fate. These unfortunates seek cures and occa¬sionally try to hunt down the lycanthrope who infected them (orthe wizard who cursed them).Description: Most lycanthropes have three forms; some have on¬ly two. See the individual descriptions for more details. The firstform is always the natural humanoid form, which over time be¬comes more and more reminiscent of the lycanthropes animalform. The second form is a hybrid, combining both animal andhumanoid features; the size of this hybrid tends to lie between thehumanoid size and the size of the creature replicated. The thirdform of the lycanthrope is externally identical to that of a normalcreature of the replicated species: the only visual clue is that theeyes may glow in the dark, A slain lycanthrope always reverts toits natural humanoid form within one round of being killed.Components: V, S r M Area of Effect: Creature touchedDuration: Special Saving Throw: NegatesThis spell causes a temporary case of lycanthropy in the victimtouched by the caster. A normal attack roll is required for the wiz¬ard to touch the victim, who must then roll a saving throw vs.spell Failure indicates that the victim is affected by lycanthropy.Every month, the victim's condition manifests with the full moon;after each attack, the victim can make another saving throw vs.spell to see if the spell's effects wear oft.Almost any type of standard lycanthropy can be induced withthis spell By using the blood of a normal animal as a spell compo¬nent, the wizard can cause the victim to assume that were- form.Lycanthropy manifests the night of the full moon, as well as thenight immediately before, and the night immediately after, thefull moon. During those nights, the character gains no benefitsfrom sleep or normal healing, and loses all memory of eventswhich happen while in animal form, In all respects, the charactergains the abilities, immunities, defenses, and bloodlust of an in¬fected lycanthrope; it cannot transmit lycanthropy. When thethree-night attack is over the victim can make another savingthrow, wiLh a -3 penalty, to throw 1 off the spells effects.A remove curse allows the character to roll a saving throw vs.polymorph; success means the curse is broken, A wish also dis¬pels the curse. No other spells can remove the curse.Contracting lycanthropy: Although the forms of attack vary witheach species, all true lycanthropes can transmit their dreadful af¬fliction. Any humanoid creature injured by a lycanthrope butnot actually killed (and presumably eaten) has a chance to con¬tract lycanthropy. This chance equals 1% per point of damagecaused by the lycanthrope. Some lycanthropes transmit their af¬fliction only through their bite, others through any natural at¬tack and some even through the weapons they use. For ease ofbookkeeping, if a character suffers 24 points of damage (from allattacks) from a true werewolf, the character has a 24% chance tobecome an infected werewolf.If the character eats belladonna within an hour of the attack,there is a 25% chance this will cure the affliction; it definitelyincapacitates the character lor ld4 days. Note that only a sprig ofbelladonna need be eaten, and it must be reasonably fresh(picked within the last week). If too much is eaten, the charactermay still be cured, but is incapacitated for 2d4 days.The only other way to lift the affliction is to cast a removecurse on the character, on the night of a full moon, or the nightimmediately preceding or following the full moon. After removecurse is cast, if the character makes a successful saving throw vs,polymorph, the curse is broken. Otherwise the changes takeplace and the spell has no effect. Cure disease and other healingspells and abilities have no effect against lycanthropy.Only infected lycanthropes can be cured. To a true lycan-thmpe, lycanthropy is as natural as breathing, and the conditioncannot be altered. True lycanthropes have complete control overtheir physical states; lhey are not affected by darkness, phases ofthe moon, or any of the other situations w T hich traditionally af¬fect infected lycanthropes.Combat: In human form, the lycanthrope uses weapons to at¬tack. They tend to use natural attack abilities in other forms.In lycanthrope form, the monster can be struck only by silveror magical weapons. Wounds from any other weapon heal tooquickly to cause actual damage. Damage from spells, acid, fire,and other special effects apply normally. Because of their vulner¬ability to silver, some lycanthropes have a psychological aver¬sion to the metal and refuse to handle it; in some cases, thepsychosomatic effect is so great that touching silver actuallybums the lycanthrope,Habitat/Society; True lycanthropes can change shape at will, re¬gardless of the time of day or phase of the moon. Infected iycan-thropes are usually humanoid during the day, When darknessfalls on the night of a full moon, or on the night immediatelypreceding or immediately following a full moon, the infected ly¬canthrope unwillingly changes shape and is overcome by blood-lust. During this time, an infected PC is beyond the playerscontrol; the DM takes over the character.The character's Strength increases temporarily to 19, ArmorClass, number of attacks, movement rate, and immunities, be¬come identical to those of the type of lycanthrope that bit thecharacter The transformed character wants only to hunt andkill, and usually selects either personal friends or enemies as vic¬tims. The werecreature makes no distinction between friends andenemies; all that matters is the Strength of the emotion bindingthem,When the character returns to normal form, 10% to 60%(td6 x 10) of any wounds suffered while in animal form heal in¬stantly The character also has hazy haunting memories of per¬forming terrible acts.Each type of lycanthrope has its own language as well as itshumanoid language; some may be able to speak the languagesused by the animals they imitate,True lycanthropes tend to avoid human society unless attack¬ing or on an errand. Lycanthropes travel alone or In packs. Thepacks are usually of similar lycanthropes, but may also includenormal animals or monsters whom the lycanthropes resemble.Some lycanthropes have the ability to summon such creatures.Ecology: Lycanthropes fit a variety of roles, depending on thetype of creatures they become, scavengers act as scavengers,predators as predators. See individual descriptions for more de¬tails.Described here is a process for creating variant lycanthropes, ei¬ther as true lycanthropes, one-shot opponents, or for the resultsof a curse of lycanthropyAnimal Type: Virtually any predator between the size of a smalldog and a large bear can be the basis for a type of lycanthrope.Most {but not all) true lycanthropes are mammals; most (but notall) are carnivores. An animal type used by the DM to create arace of true lycanthropes should be a carnivorous mammal withanimal Intelligence (1), or rarely, a reptile, bird, or even Bsh withanimal Intelligence There has never been a reliable report of awere-amphibian of any type.Induced lycanthropes, by spell or item, can be created using awide variety of animal types, and even monstrous creatures.Appearance: In humanoid form, the lycanthrope has subtle indi¬cations of the curse, ranging from hair color like that of the ani¬mal to general facial type, to voice and actions. In animal form,the lycanthrope resembles a large version of the normal animal(but not so large as to be immediately noticeable). On close in¬spection, the animal form's eyes show a faint spark of unnaturalintelligence, and often glow red in the dark.The lycanthrope may also have a third form, part human andpart animal. This form is usually humanoid in general shape, andthe body has the same covering as the animal (usually fur. some¬times scales or feathers). Facial features and body shape changesomewhat, gaining more characteristics of the animal (fangs,whiskers, daws, animal leg structure, etc,),Statistics and Attributes: To determine the new lycanthrope s sta¬tistics, extrapolate from those of the base animal and from exist¬ing lycanthrope types, If the base animal is more powerful than awolf, the new lycanthrope should have more Hit Dice than awerewolf; if the base animal is similar to a giant rat, the newwerecreature should have about the same Hit Dice as a wererat.In almost every case, the new lycanthrope should have at least 1-2 Hit Dice more than the base animal.The lycanthrope gets the same attack forms as the base animaltype, such as daws, bite, tail slap, head butt, or whatever. Thedamage should be very similar to that caused by the base animal.Many lycanthropes associate with animals of their base type, andthe werebeast should be able to dominate such a group.Armor Class depends on the base animaVs natural toughness,speed, and dexterity. The lycanthrope should have a slightly bet¬ter AC than the base animal, perhaps by 1 or 2 places.Movement rate should be the same as that of the base animal,as should diet and habitat. Morale should be about one categorybetter than that of the base animakThe creature's alignment tends to be an extrapolated version ofthe base animal's alignment. Since most base animals are neutral,the DM must look at the animal's tendencies. If the animal is avicious predator and a strong fighter, the Ivcanthropic version isprobably evil; it tries to stay out of the way of other creatures, itmay be good or neutral. If the animal is very independent, thelycanthrope should be chaotic; if the animal is very methodicaland has regular habits, the lycanthrope is probably lawful.Vulnerability; True lycanthropes share a vulnerability to silverweapons, possibly because of the metal's mystical relationshipwith the moon, or the inherent qualities or powers of the metalitself. Extremely rare variants might have no such vulnerability,but instead may have developed a weakness for another preciousmetal (gold and copper being the most likely), or perhaps forbronze, obsidian, or even wood.Special Abilities: In addition to their abilities of shapeshifting,calling normal animals to their aid, and so forth, some lycan¬thropes have other special powers. These should not be rolledrandomly for a new lycanthrope type, but chosen to fit with theattitude and style of the base animal. A few samples are listedbelow,• Regeneration (except for damage from silver weapons)Hit only by silver,cold iron, or +1 orbetter magical weap¬onsThe seawolves are humans who can assume a form combining as¬pects of a sea] and a wolf. Their packs roam the seas in search of shipsto attack .The monstrous form of the lesser seawolf has the 6 to 7 foot longbody of a seal. The head and shoulders are those of a wolf. In humanform the lesser sea wolves stand 3 to 6 feet talh All are thickly mus¬cled and have tiny ears and long hair that covers their head andshoulders like a mane. The lesser seawolf has a hybrid form of a wolf-man, a humanoid shape that retains the seawolfs teeth, claws, andfur: statistics for this form are given in parentheses above.Combat; Lesser seawolves approach a ship in seawolf form, thenchange into the hybrid form and climb aboard. There they use theirteeth and claws to kill their opponents, If the ship looks too heavilydefended, the seawolves may gnaw holes in the hull in order to sinkthe ship.Unlike most other lycanthropes, lesser seawolves have no specialprotection against normal weapons. Dead seawolves revert to theirhuman form in a single round.Habitat/Society: Most seawolves were formerly fishermen or sail¬ors; as such, they also tend to be male and human. They travel inpacks with those of their own kind. Their fierce hatred of their form¬er coworkers drives them to seek to kill them or pass on the lyean-thropic curse. Victims who acquire the disease become seawolves in2*5 days. Once night falls, the new seawolf slips into the water andgoes off in search of a pack.Seawolves are nomads constantly roaming the cooler sections ofthe seas. They neither build lairs nor keep treasure. During the day,they sleep on beaches or in caves or appropriated houses. If surprisedon a beach, they pretend to be shipwreck victims, then kill the in¬truders and take their clothing. If at sea. the seawolves are still able tosleep during the day by floating on their backs: in this case they maybe mistaken fora duster of drowning victims. If a ship moves dose toinvestigate, the sea wolves wait for the best opportunity to attack andtake over the ship.Seawolves breathe air. They can remain submerged for 17-24Ud§+ 16) minutes. Failure to surface after that time causes them tosuffer 1-6 points of damage each round until they drown.Female seawolves give birth to single cubs. These may appear to behuman infants during the day or baby seals at night. Seawolves lackparental feelings and abandon the cubs Although the cubs are ableto swim and hunt from birth, they have difficulty keeping up withadults and often drown during the day if they are at sea. Only 5% ofcubs reach adulthood. The offspring of a seawolf and a human aregood swimmers who feel mysteriously drawn to the sea, but few(25%) become seawolves upon reaching adolescence.Seawolves may ally themselves with other evil aquatic lycan-thropes. They hate selkies, whom they consider allies of the human¬oids. Lesser seawolves attack selkies on sight.Their diet includes a variety of foods, such as shellfish, fish, sea¬birds, sea mammals, and anyone they can sink their teeth into. Occa¬sionally packs may wander into a town and take over a tavern for around of drinking and wenching.Seawolf personalities are a twisted version of their original, humanpersonalities. It is as if the seawolf persona is a savage, magnifiedversion of all the original person s bad traits. Seawolves periodicallyreturn to their original home port. This may be a subconscious long¬ing for their old life or a means to renew their hatred of those stillhumanoid. If a seawolf spots his old self's mate or child, he may at¬tempt to make contact.Ecology: Seawolves are the sworn enemies ot any humanoid whomakes his living in the sea. They live to destroy shipping, spread ter¬ror. and spread their curse further.The monstrous form of the greater seawolf has a 12 to 15 foot longbody, but is otherwise Identical to the lesser seawolf . In human form,greater seawolves stand 6 to 7 feet tall,Combat; Greater seawolves assume their human forms to get doseto their opponents. The typical plan is to bite or strangle one or twodeckhands, take their weapons, and begin a general assault.In seawolf form, greater seawolves can be harmed only by silver,cold iron, or magical weapons of +1 or better, Steel weapons haveno effect. Dead seawolves revert to their human form in one round.
Like the other species of lycanthrope found in Raven I oft P two va¬rieties of werebat exist—natural (or true) and infected. Truewerebats are those creatures who have been born to werebat par¬ents. The parents may be either true or infected werebats them¬selves but the offspring of any two werebats is a true werebat. Inthose rare cases when a child is born with one werebat and onehuman parent, there is a 50% chance that it will be a true werebatand a 25% chance that it will be an infected werebat.True werebats have three Forms: normal human, vampire bat,or hybrid. In the first form, it is marked by bat-like features andtraits (an aversion to bright lights, keen night vision, a taste forblood or raw meat, etc.), In its vampire bat form, it looks justlike a common vampire bat. By far the most feared of its forms,however, is that of the hybrid. In this form, it retains its human¬oid shape but takes on the added features of a bat. The arms ex¬tend to become willowy and leather wings form under them, theteeth sharpen into deadly fangs* and the snout protrudes fromthe face. The nails stretch into deadly claws and the eyes spawnan inner glow when light hits them.Infected werebats have only two of the three forms listedabove. Most (75%) have a human and hybrid form* while therest have only a human and true bat form.Combat: The type of attacks employed by a werebat dependupon its form. In human form, it will depend upon weapons toinflict damage, for its bare hands inflict but ld2 points per at¬tack. li at a\\ possible, the creature will avoid combat in thisform.In bat form, they attack just as if they were bats. Each round,they may attack once and inflict but a single point of damagewith any successful strike. The bitten victim, of course, stands achance of contracting lycanthropy (see below), even from thismeager wound. Opponents of a werebat in this form will findthat it is unusually resilient, for it has its full human-form hitpoints.In hybrid form, the werebat does not have the manual dexteri¬ty to employ weapons effectively. However, its deadly sharpclaws and needle-like teeth make it far from helpless. In eachround it may strike twice with its daws (inflicting ld4 points ofdamage each), If both of these attacks hits, it may follow with avicious bite that does 2d4 points of damage. Werebats can fly intheir hybrid form and often use this ability to their advantage incombat.Anyone who takes damage from a werebat s natural attacksstands a chance of contracting the disease of lycanthropy and be¬coming an infected werebat. Every point of damage done Indi¬cates a flat 2% chance per point that the victim will becomeinfected. The procedures for curing an infected lycanthrope aregiven in Chapter 5 of the Ravenloft Boxed Set.Werebats can be harmed only by silver or +1 or belter magicalweapons. Any wound inflicted by another type of weapon knitsas quickly as it is inflicted, hinting al Ihe creatures true nature.Habitat/Society: Werebats favor caves in lightly wooded, tem¬perate regions as their homes. From here, they can fly out andseek prey from which they can draw the blood necessary to sat¬isfy their thirst.Werebat caves are commonly home to only one family ofwerebats (two parents and 1-4 young). The young remain in truebat form until they reach 3 years of age, A this time, they matureinto adults and, within a single year, become fully grown. Thistime of transformation brings out a great hunger in the creature,which forces it to spend most of its time hunting and feeding.Human villages near a werebat cave will certainly lose many citi¬zens to the feasting of the ravenous creature at this time.In addition to the werebat family, each cave will contain 20-200 (20diO) common bats and 1-10 giant bats. AH of these lesserare under the command of the adult werebats and will act as theirsentinels and companions.Ecology: Although werebats favor humans and demihumans asprey they have been known to feed on the blood of other mam¬mals (like cattle and horses) when preferred prey is not available,Interestingly such animals seem to be immune to the lycanthro¬py that these dark creatures spread.While werebats do look upon humans and demihumans as ani¬mals to be devoured, they are not cruel or evil in their attacks.They simply regard such beings as having a lower place in thefood chain. Werebats will, typically refer to themselves as 'pred¬ators of the nights
Hit only by silver or +1 orbetter magical weaponsNilWerebear? are humans who can transform themselves into largebrown bears. They are the best known good-aligned lycan-thropes. The ursine form most often resembles a brown bear.Some have blond, reddish, black, or ivory fur (the latter is com¬mon in frozen regions).In human form they are large, stout, well-muscled, and hairy.Their brown hair is thick; males usually wear beards, Some havereddish, blond, ivory or black hair; this matches the color of theursine form. They dress in simple cloth and leather garments thatare easily removed, repaired, or replaced,Combat: In human form, the werebear uses available weapons,preferring axes, spears, and knives, since these have practical ap¬plications suitable for woodland life. If attacked in daylight, thewerebear usually remains human unless death is likely. Theshapechange renders the werebear helpless for a round. In ursineform, the werebear attacks with tw p o swiping daws and a bite. Ifboth claws hit, during the next round the werebear can hug for anadditional 2-16 points of damage. This subsequent damage con¬tinues automatically each round thereafter.Like those of other lycanthropes, the werebears defenses func¬tion only in the bear form. Weapons used against the werebearmust be either silver or magical weapons of +1 or better. Were-bears can summon 1-6 brown bears within 2-12 turns, providedsuch animals are within one mile. Werebears heal at three timesthe normal human rate and can cure disease in another creaturein 1-4 weeks if they so desire.If a werebear dies, he reverts to his human form in one round.HabitafSociety: Werebears are normally solitary creatures. Ashumans, they build cabins far from settled areas, preferably in adeep forest near well-stocked waters, Werebears do not marryalthough they may have preferred mates they meet on a very ir¬regular basis. Females bear 1-2 children in human form. Suchchildren are very stout and grow quickly. Within eight years theygain adolescence and the ability to change into werebears. Short¬ly after, the mother drives the children out and seeks a mate tostart the cycle anew'. The newly independent young are discreetlyguided and assisted by older werebears. Despite their apparentisolationism and rugged individualism, werebears have a sense ofcommunity. They never attack each other and aid any werebearthreatened by another lycanthrope species,Werebears are closest to fores towelling classes like rangers,druids, and wildlife-oriented priests. They rarely enter villagesand never enter cities except in dire emergencies or to help othergood-aligned people, especially those threatened by evil lycan¬thropes. Werebears hate wererats and werewolves.The average werebear claims a territory 1 to 4 square miles insize. Fishing areas are open to all werebears. A werebear feels adose bond to its home region, acting as a game warden to protectits territory and the animals therein from the ravages of in¬truders,Werebears do not travel a great deal. Only the rare individual(usually young) can be coaxed into (Dining a band of adventur¬ers. Werebears may join an adventuring group as guides, provid¬ed the money is right and the job is agreeable.Treasure is usually limited to small, valuable commodities likegold, platinum, gems, and jewelry. Werebears rarely carry anytreasure and instead hide it near their homes. They also collectscrolls, potions, and other magical items, often as fees or rewardsfor past services, Werebears destroy any magical items that spe-dfically affect lycanthropes or bears, since such items might beused against themselves.Ecology: Werebears are omnivorous, preferring fish, smallmammals, and a honey-rich mead. This mead is extremely intox*icating to normal humans. Werebears have few natural enemies.Their closest enemies are the werewolves who share their prefer*red wilderness regions.
Wereboars are humans who are able to transform themselves in¬to a form combining human and boar features. Their tempers areas ugly as their features.In human form wereboars tend to be stocky muscular peopleof average height. Their hair is short and stiff. They dress in sim¬ple garments that are easy to remove, repair, or replace.The boar form stands slightly taller than the human form, butthe hunchbacked posture thrusts the head forward. The head isidentical to a boars head, complete with short tusks. The torsosdiameter is doubled, the neck shortened, and the feet becomehoof-like. Stiff, black hair like wire bristles covers the skin.Combat: The wereboar combines his hands and tusks For dead¬ly effect. The wereboar seizes a target and pulls it toward hishead. He stabs his tusks into the victim, then pulls his victim toone side white swinging his head in the other direction, whichtears the wound further. He then tosses the victim aside and at¬tacks someone else. A wereboar will gladly wade into the centerof a group of opponents and then fight his way out.In human form the wereboar attacks with whatever weapon hehas, Wereboars prefer bludgeoning or chopping weapons, suchas axes and maces, rather than stabbing or missile weapons suchas swords, spears, or hows.Ln either form the wereboar is immune to damage from non-magicai and nonsilver weapons, Such wounds are little morethan scratches that quickly heal.Habitat Society: Wereboars are ill-tempered, easily angered,and almost as prone to attack their few friends as they are to at¬tack an enemy. As humans they are rude, crude, and vulgar.However, they are invaluable allies in a fight. A wereboar doesnot give his friendship easily, but when he does it is a specialbond he will not break. The problem is, due to the wereboarspeculiar personality, it is difficult to tell whether he is beingfriendly or hostile.Wereboars prefer dense woodlands, ideally far from towns andcities. Like werebears, they live in caves or build cabins for theirhomes. Their homes tend to be ill-kept and slovenly. Wereboarsdon't repair things, they replace them.Despite their personalities, wereboars have close-knit families.Females give birth to litters of ld4 + 2 offspring. Newborns arevery small by human standards but are strong and able to crawlhours afterbirth. The offspring mature quickly. When they reachadolescence at eight years, they gain the ability to become were¬boars themselves. A wereboar father appears to be distant andaloof, but a staunch protector who will attack any foe whothreatens his family no matter how uneven the odds. Females areaggressive when defending their young ( +2 bonus to attack roll).Neither males nor females check morale when defending theiryoung.The diet is a mixture of small game, vegetables, and fungi.Their favorite food is the subterranean fungus called truffles;even in human form they can detect the truffles growing severalfeet underground. Wereboars aren't very good gardeners. A typi¬cal garden is a cleared field strewn with a variety of seeds andbulbs in the hope that something edible will grow. Wereboar cui¬sine is equally haphazard; it can be summed up as burned meatand stews.Wereboars avoid normal hogs and boars. They are suspiciousof strangers. Wereboars assume everyone is hostile. In humanform they may wait for the first attack, but when in boar formthey usually (75% chance) chase the intruders away and attackany who defend themselves.Ecology: Wereboars produce little of value, whether tradegoods or services. Their main desire is simply to stay away fromeveryone else. In the wild, they defend their territories againstany intruders. Wereboars fit into orcish society as well as they dointo human society, and might sometimes assist or ally them¬selves with orcish forces. Wereboars can tolerate half-ores.
1-2 1 2-12, or by weaponCharms, spellsSilver or +1 weapons to hitSpecial (see below)A foxwoman is an elven-appeariny woman who is able to trans¬form herself into a silver fox form or a silver-furred humanoid(vixen) form with a fox's head. They are extremely self-centered.The female elven form of the foxwoman is extremely beautiful.She has silver or silver-streaked hair, including a widows peak.She dresses attractively in loose garments. A pouch holds valu¬ables and spell components.The vixen form is a hybrid of elven and fox-like features. Thebody and limbs are those of the elven form but covered with sil¬very fur. The head and tail are fox-like. The vixen may wear el¬ven clothing* The vixen can run very quickly (18).The silver fox form appears to be a normal, large fox* It movesextremely fast (24), can pass tairirouf trace, and is 90% undetect¬able in undergrowth if it passes out of view for a moment.Com bat: The silver fox s bite inflicts 1 -2 points of damage but isotherwise harmless. The vixens more savage bite causes 2d6points of damage. Human or elven women who are bitten by avixen for 50% or more of their hit points become foxwomenwithin three days unless both a cure disease and a remote cursespell are cast upon the victim by a priest of at least 12th level.In elven form, the foxwoman relies on weapons. She gains a+ 1 bonus with bow or sword. Her best weapon is her incrediblebeauty. Any human, humanoid, or demihuman males whoseWisdoms are 13 or less are effectively caught by a charm spell.Those whose Wisdoms are 14 or greater are not charmed but stillfind the foxwoman extremely attractive. In elven form, the fax-woman has magic use as a wizard of level ld4. She is 90% resist¬ant to sleep and charm spells.In any form, the foxwoman is able to see by Lnfravision (60-foot range). They can only be harmed by silver or +1 or bettermagical weapons. Scars from nonfatal wounds vanish within amonth.vain, and hedonistic. Foxwomen serve their vanity by enslavinghumanoid males. Those males become servants and companions*Werefoxes do not keep dwarves, gnomes, or half lings; suchmales are slain quietly as soon as the opportunity arises.Each foxwoman is always accompanied by Ld4 + I charmedmales. At least one of the males is a fighter (70%) or ranger(30%) of level ld4 + 1. There is a 50% chance that any one of theother males is also a fighter of level ld4. There is a 10% chancethat one of the remaining males is a cleric (10%), druid (45%),mage (10%), thief (25%) ( or some other class (10%) of level ld4.Of her elven or half-elven companions, 25% are multi-class char¬acters* All males who do not fit into any of the above categoriesare 0-level fighters and elves or halbelves of 1 Hit Die, The malesmay use such magical items as they possessed prior to beingcharmed into the foxwoman's service,Foxwomen are barren. They must kidnap or adopt their chil¬dren. There is a 10% chance that a foxwoman has a "daughter: 1The foxwoman has stolen an elven girl, infected her with lycan-thropy, and is raising her as a foxwoman. Such a child is beld8 + 5 years old* If she is 12-13, she is treated the same as a nor¬mal foxwoman: otherwise she is a noncombatanLNon-elven women who are afflicted with iycanthropy undergoa slow transformation that alters their normal form. Over a peri¬od of one to two years, such women turn into elven women; onlytheir faces and odd marks (tattoos, birthmarks) provide faintproof of their old identities.Habitat Society: Foxwomen dwell in lonely woodlands farfrom humanoid communities* Their homes may be hidden cot¬tages or comfortably furnished cave complexes: in either casetheir homes are filled with typical human comforts. Foxwomenare solitary in regard to their own kind. They are self-serving.Ecology; Foxwomen are unique among the lycanthropes. Theyhave no major goals or desires aside from pampering themselvesand feeding their vanity. They have little contact with other fox¬women (whom they see as rivals), real foxes (irrelevant beasts),or other lycanthropes (crude, unattractive, and uncharmable).
Wererats, also called ratmen, are humans who can transformthemselves into three forms—human, human-sized ratman. andgiant rat. They are sly and evil, and usually inhabit tunnel com¬plexes beneath cities.The wererats human form tends to be a thin, wiry individualof shorter than average height. His eyes constantly dart around,and his nose and mouth may twitch if he is excited. Males oftenhave thin, ragged moustaches.The ratman form is somewhat shorter than the human form.The head, torso, and tail are identical to those of a rat, but thelimbs remain human.The third form is that of a giant rat 2 feet from nose to rump.This form is identical to that of the giant rat (q.vj, This is thepreferred form for travel and spying on potential victims.Were rats are often followed by 1-6 mice or rats that are instinc¬tively drawn to them but are not controlled by them.Combat: In aU three forms, wererats rely on weapons for theirattacks, preferring shortswords and daggers. Anyone who is in¬jured by a true wererat has a 1 % chance per point of damage ofbecoming a wererat. In their ratman and giant rat forms, were¬rats can be hurt only by silver or magical weapons.Wererats prefer to attack from ambush, A favorite tactic is toassume human shape and lure unsuspecting victims into a trap.This is the only time wererats are voluntarily alone. Victims arethen robbed, held for ransom, or eaten.Each wererat is able to summon and control 2-12 giant rats.sewers and escape their attention. Unfortunately for the wererat,the sewer s stains and smells do not vanish when it assumes hu¬man form. This effectively limits wererats to the less savory sec¬tions of town as well as reducing the number of humans whomight unknowingly mate with a wererat,Wererats see cities as their hunting grounds. They delight inmatching their superior intellects and meager physical skillsagainst the more powerful and numerous humans, Bui they areno fools; they will not attack unless they are sure they can win. Ifa battle is going against them, wererats will scatter, transform torat form, and head for the sanctuary of the sewers. They won'teven defend their own fairs. Their attitude is that since they hadstolen most of their belongings in the first place, they can alwaysreplace them.Wererats are greedy and collect anything they think mighthave worth. The resulting trove usually has more junk than trea¬sure, but a thorough search may reveal a wide variety of valu¬ables.Wererats frequent sleazy taverns, both for the cheap alcoholand to follow drunks Into the streets to drag them away lor thenext day's meal.Habitat Society: Wererats live in packs, regardless of form,never being alone if they can help it. Solitary wererats are eithersole survivors or engaged in mischief. They do not form interper¬sonal bonds like love or marriage. In fact, wererats rarely matewith their own kind. Offspring of a wererat and a human womanare human, although they are small, like their fathers. Offspringof a female wererat resemble giant rats with human-like paws.These ratlings grow to maturity in two years and gain the abilityto transform themselves into human children with an apparentage about three times that of the ratling's actual age.Wererats prefer subterranean lairs hidden among the sewersand catacombs beneath cities. Nothing can pass through theEcology: Wererats are parasites. They recognize that they arephysically weaker than most species that dominate the surface.They have found and exploited the one niche where they have achance to dominate, the world beneath the cities. They feed onhumans and steal their riches. Humans unknowingly protect thewererats from both surface dwelling creatures and those whomighl burrow up from far below. Besides, the humans pay forthe upkeep of the wererat s sewer realm.Psychologically, wererats remind humans that no matter howstrongly defended they think they are, monsters can still get in.Mothers describe wererats as bogeymen to scare unruly children.
We re ravens are a race of wise and good-aligned shapechangerswho seem to have migrated to Ravenloft from another realm(probably Greyhawk) centuries ago. While they are no longerround on their plane of origin, they have managed to survive inRavenloftNatural wereravens have three forms, that of a normal human,a huge raven, and a hybrid of the two. Infected wereravens canassume only two of the above forms. While all infectedwereravens can take the human form, roughly half are able toturn into hybrids while the others can transform into huge rav¬ens.The hybrid form of these creatures looks much like that of awe rebat. The arms grow long and thin, sprouting feathers andtransforming into wings. The mouth hardens and projects into astraight, pecking beak, and the eyes turn jet black, A coat offeathers replaces the normal body hair of the human form.Combat: Wereravens are deadly opponents in close combat, al¬though they seldom engage in it. Because they can be hit only bysilver weapons or those with a + 2 or better magical bonus, thesecreatures do not fear most armed parties.When in human form, a wereraven retains its natural immuni¬ties to certain weapons, but has no real attack of its own. Ifforced to fight unarmed, it inflicts a mere 1-2 points of damage.For this reason, wereravens in human form often employ weap¬ons, doing damage appropriate to the arms they wield.In raven form, the wereraven attacks as if it were a commonexample of that creature. Thus, it inflicts but 1-2 points of dam¬age but has a 1 in 10 chance of scoring an eye peck with eachsuccessful attack. Any eye peck will cause the target to lose theuse of one eye until a heal or regeneration spell can be cast on thevictim. Half-blinded persons (those who have lost 1 eye) suffer a-2 on all attack rolls. A second eye peck results in total blind¬ness until the above cure can be affected.In hybrid form the wereraven's arms have grown into wings,making them almost useless in combat. However, the muscles intheir mouths, beaks strengthen, giving them a savage bite. Eachattack made with the creatures beak inflicts 2d6 points ofdamage.Anyone bitten or pecked by the wereraven has a 2% chanceper point of damage inflicted of becoming an infected wereraven.Infected lycanthropes are discussed in the Rfrvenloft Boxed Set.Wereravens are strong flyers and often use this ability to theiradvantage in combat.Habitat/Society: A wereraven family will be found only at theheart of a dense forest. Here, they live in the hollowed out bodyof a great tree. Entrance to their lair is possible only from above(if one does not wish to cut or break through the trunk itself).Curiously, the wereravens are able to keep the tree in which theynest from dying even after they have hollowed it out, so it is diffi¬cult to distinguish from the normal trees around it.Wereravens recognize that they are bastions of good in a landdominated by evil. They have managed to survive by avoidinglarge populations or overt acts of good that would draw the at¬tention of the reigning lords to them. Thus, a wereraven flockwill generally have no more than 2-8 adults in it. Of course, suchgroups have young with them (1-4 per 2 adults), but these areseldom encountered for they remain in a true raven state untilthey are old enough to fend for themselves. In addition, a typicalwereraven lair will draw 10-100 flOdlO) common ravens to nestin the trees about it These wise birds will serve the wereravens,doing their bidding and striving to protect them from harm,Wereravens are not opposed to helping out the cause of goodin Ravenloft, but they do so reluctantly. This is not because theydo not wish to do good, but because they fear the wrath of theDark Powers, It is said that the wereravens have come to the aidof endangered Vistani dans on several occasions and that closeties exist between these two races, but neither will admit thisopenly.Ecology: Wereravens are omnivores who prefer to maintain avegetarian diet. They enjoy berries and nuts, but will eat carrionor kill for fresh meat from time to time in order to maintain goodhealth.
Any wildernessVery rareSolitaryNocturnalCarnivoreAverage (3-10)Di 0(x5)NeutralWeretigers are humans, usually female, that have the ability totransform into tigerlike forms. They have a strong affinity for allfelines.The human form tends to be sleekly muscular, taHer than aver¬age, and very agile. The voices of weretigers are husky and theytend to roll their r's.The weretiger form is a hybrid between a human and a tiger. Itis about 25% larger than the human form, and is covered bytiger-striped hide. A 3-foot tail extends from the spine. The legsare more feline than human; this form walks on its toes. The headis also a mixture of features. The ears, nose, muzzle, and teeth aretigerlike, but the eyes and overall shape are human. If the humanform's hair is long, it is still present. The fingernails grow intoclaws, Despite the changes, the hybrid form can pass for humanat a distance if properly disguised.The third form is that of a fully grown tiger without any traceof human features.Weretigers speak the languages of all feline breeds, so normalfelines, including the great cats, have a 75% chance of beingfriendly toward a weretiger. Even feline monsters have a 25%chance of being automatically friendly. However, weretigers arerarely found in the company of real tigers, being only 5% likelyto be accompanied by them.Combat: In either tiger form, the weretiger attacks with a varie¬ty of punches, raking daws, and bites. The weretigers punchesare so strong that they cause 1-4 points of damage. Otherwise thedaws can be raked across an opponent, causing 2-5 points ofdamage. The teeth are the most dreadful weapon. They can teara victim apart or crush a windpipe. Weretigers usually bite onlyin their full tiger form.In human form, the weretiger uses a wide variety of weaponswith which it is adept, A weretiger is also good at unarmed com¬bat; it retains its deadly punch in this form, as well as an en¬hanced sense of smell and night vision.Ha bitaf Society: For various reasons were tigresses outnumberweretigers five to one.Weretigers travel alone or in small prides. They do not marrybut have preferred mates, which may be either humans or tigers.Weretigers give birth to one or two cubs. The cubs are the hybridform; they look like fuzzy human babies with tails. Cubs maturequickly. They can crawl within days, walk within a month, andhunt within a year. Their physical size matches that of a humanchild of three times the same age. At age six, they reach adoles¬cence and gain the ability to transform into a fully human form.At age 12, they gain the ability to assume a full-tiger form; this isconsidered the mark of adulthood.li a male weretiger mates with either a real tigress or humanwoman, the offspring initially has the same appearance as themother. Lycanthropic transformations do not begin until the hy¬brid reaches adolescence.Weretigers are omnivorous. In the wild they roam a territoryof 7-10 (ld4 +6) square miles. Their homes are usually near hu¬man settlements. These tend to be well kept cabins with smallherb and vegetable gardens. The only livestock will be a varietyof cats and some poultry.Weretigers rarely live in confined settings such as cities or largetowns because their lycanthropic nature would be hard to con¬ceal- If found m such a setting, one or two weretigers in humanform will be on an errand, such as a mission, a revel ora simpleshopping trip, In any form, weretigers are very confident and notprone to attack unless provoked.Treasure varies widely acquired as payment for past services,plunder from past adventures, or scavenged from the remains ofpast opponents. Weretigers have an affinity for gems and oftenkeep a small cache hidden somewhere near their homes.Ecology: Weretigers are the most adaptable of the Ivcan-thropes. They are equally at home in human, feline, or monstercompany.
Hit only by silver or +1 orbetter magical weaponStandardM (6' tall)Werewolves are the most feared of the lycanthropes, men whocan transform into wolflike beasts. They should not be confusedwith walfweres (q.vj—wolves who turn into men. Great enmityexists between werewolves and wolfweres.The human forms of werewolves have no distinguishing traits.The werewolf form is equally varied. Many have a bipedal formthat is a hybrid of human and lupine features. These creatures areabout IToot taller and stronger than their human forms. Thebodies are fur-covered and have short tails, wotflike legs, andheads that are combinations in varying degrees of human andlupine features,A second form of hybrid is more wolflike, and may be mis¬taken for a large wolf when it runs on all four legs. This hybridcan also walk erect and has humanlike hands.Another type of werewolf (about 20%) looks exactly like alarge wolf about the size of a bear. This creature has no humanfeatures, although the eyes may glow red in the dark.Combat: In their human forms, werewolves attack with a vari¬ety of weapons, generally those common to their human identityand class. In the werewolf or wolflike forms, the creature attackswith its fearsome teeth, if the form has hands, the werewolf maygrab its prey for a better bite.In the wolf form, the werewolf can be harmed only by silver ormagical weapons of +1 or better. Wounds from other weaponsheal too quickly to actually injure the werewolf.Werewolves attack in packs; packs including females and youngdrive the adults to hit harder. If the female is attacked, the malefights at +2 to hit and does full damage with each blow. If theyoung are attacked, the female attacks at +3 to hit and does fulldamage. Cubs with 60% full growth are -4 to hit, cubs with 70% are-3 to hit. and so on. All cubs inflict 2-5 points of damage.Habitat Society: Werewolf packs roam the wilderness in searchof human or other prey. True werewolves tend to be nomadic,although infected werewolves often continue to live the life towhich they were accustomed. Werewolves retreat to their densduring the winter months or the years when the females are rais¬ing the helpless cubs. As humans, werewolves do not buildhomes, although they may take over existing dwellings, some¬times the home of past victims. Caves and burrows are the densmost commonly used in the wild. These sparsely furnished re¬treats are used mostly as a sleeping area and a place to store theirhuman possessions. Many werewolf families roam the country¬side in wagons, much like gypsies. In fact, this has caused manygypsies to be accused of being werewolves.Werewolves live in packs, generally related by bloodlines,Werewolf packs of five to eight individuals are single familygroups consisting of a male, female, and three to six cubs, six tonine years old. Cubs under six years old are kept in secluded densand never encountered by hostile humans.When pregnant, the female retreats with her mate and an olderfemale who will act as midwife. In a very secluded area they pre¬pare a special den that will be home for the mother and her cubsfor the next six years. The female gives birth to a litter of 5-10cubs. The cubs are born in the hybrid form; they resemble fuzzyhuman babies with wolflike faces. Infant mortality h high; 2-4cubs of each litter never reach 60% growth. Cubs grow at thesame rate as humans for their first five years. By the sixth yearthey attain 60% of their full growth- At this point they developthe ability to transform into their other forms. Each followingyear brings an increase of an additional 10% growth, Were-wolves are considered mature at age 10,If a werewolf mates with a woman, the offspring is completelyhuman. The temperament reflects the father; such children areviolent, combative, and prone to mental illness. There is a 10%chance each year from the onset of adolescence that such a childwill spontaneously transform into a true w r erewolf,Ecology: Werewolves are a peculiar hybrid of human and lu¬pine personalities. They are savage killers, yet they are devotedto their close-knit families. Werewolves are hostile toward lycan¬thropes who oppose them, especially werebears.
Mammals are the most common of the vertebrate. Generallybom alive, mammals possess hair. Warm-blooded, mammalsmaintain a single body temperature, regulated by an internalthermostat. Most mammals are harmless to humanoids and theyare often trained to perform a specific function,Ape, Carnivorous: Carnivorous apes gain a *2 to their surpriserolls. They eat anything they can kill.Baboon, Wild: Wild baboons are large, herbivorous primatesthat are characterized by long arms and legs, large dog-like muz¬zles. and sharp canine teeth.Badger: Badgers are vicious little creatures that prefer to runfrom danger than fight* If cornered, the badger will fight, at¬tempting to bite the tender throat of its opponent,Banderlog: Banderlogs resemble baboons with green skin andbrown fur. They throw retch plant fruit or coconuts at enemies.Coconuts cause ld4 + l points damage while retch plant fruitsplash a 5-foot radius area with nauseating fluids. Those caughtin the splash, retch for three rounds and their Strength is reducedby half for the next hour + no saving throw allowed.Bhaergala: This predator jumps its prey from great heights. It candrop from as high as 60 feet, causing maximum damage plus ld6for ever\ r 10 feet dropped. This beast heals 2 hit points every dayand gains a +3 to all saving throws vs. poison, hour times a daythe bhaergala can turn spells as the ting of spell turning.Boar. Wild: Wild boar continue to attack until they are reducedto "7 hit points* The giant boar is often called an alothere.Chattun Chatturs, called space bandits, are small mammals thatexhibit traits of both primates and rodents. Not very combative,they fight in defense of their nests, km, or friends,Cooshee: Known as elven dogs, they only bark to warn their ehvert masters of danger. They can strike bipedal opponents withfront paws to knock man-sized or smaller creatures down,Dakon: Dakons are intelligent apes with a reasonable grasp ofthe common tongue. When attacking it gains a +2 bonus.Debbi: This desert scavenger, a baboon-hyena crossbreed, cancause fear by stamping its feet in a slow, rhythm and calling forthmagical power that makes its fur crackle and spark. This fearlasts for two rounds,Goat: When a goat charges, it gains a +2 attack bonus and doesan additional 1-2 points damage.Gorilla: The gorilla is non-aggressive and shy but fights fiercelywhen threatened or cornered.H.singoing: The hsing-sing are a recluse ape-like race believed topersonify the principles of pacifism and harmony with nature.However, once a year, for 2d6+4 days, the males gather intoraiding bands and complete the "war season.” Their bands attackhumanoid settlements on the edge of their territory. Such attacksare impartial; pillaging good and evil creatures alike. To maxi¬mize the advantage of surprise, the hsing-sing rarely attack thesame settlement two years in a row.Hyena: Often confused as a canine the hyena taunts enemieswith its nervous, high-pitched howl.Jackal; Jackals are timid scavengers that run from the threat ofother predators. When attacking, the jackal darts in to bite itsvictim and quickly retreats to a safe distance. If more than onejackal is trying to down an animal they attack in a haphazardfashion with little or no coordination of effort.Losel: An arboreal ore baboon cross, losel resemble primitivehumans m many respects. They can throw stones up to 20 yardsfor ld4 points damage.Monkey Spider: Measuring 1-inch in length, monkey spidersfight creatures their own size, avoiding combat with larger crea¬tures* If forced to battle such creatures, the monkeys jump andbite at an eye, The bite causes extreme pain and the victim musthold his eye and take no other action for a round, giving themonkey a chance to run away. Monkey spiders can jump 10 feetdown or 5 feet forward and can climb anything a typical spidercan.Porcupine: Porcupines are covered with long barbed quills. Thecreature is unable to throw its quills. Generally, a predator whochases the fleeing creature gets a mouthful of quills which causesthe damage cited above.Rathe: The rot he (pronounced "Toth-AY") is a musk ox-like crea¬ture with an aversion to light. It prefers to live underground nearlichen and moss.Skunk: Anyone within a skunks IDxlOxlO-foot cloud of muskmust save vs. poison or be nauseated for 1-4 rounds, losing 50%of Strength and Dexterity,Sleek: This ermine-like mammal surprises opponents on 1-5 onIdo, On an attack roll of 19 or 20, the sleek opens a major vein,causing 2d6 points of damage. Every round thereafter, the victimsuffers Ido more points damage until the wound is wrapped witha tourniquet, direct pressure, or magical healing.Stag, Wild; Wild stags are the aggressive males of the deer herds.Normally docile and passive, they defend their herds against allbut the most fearsome opponents.Stench Kow: Stench Kme are the cattle of the lower planes. Theyare immune to all forms of cold, fire, and poison, in close quar¬ters , their breath and bodies are so foul, a save vs. poison mustbe made or the character is affected as if struck by a stinkingcloud spell The save must be made every three rounds of expo¬sure.Taen These vile primates live in cold mountain caves. Theythrow spears before dosing in for hand-to-hand.Tyrg: When in melee, tyrgs emit fierce howls that mildly stuntheir victims t +2 penalty to initiative and ^2 penalty to attackrolls) for the next three rounds + no saving throw allowed. Theseare tiger-dog crossbreeds that move silently 75% of the time andhave a +2 bonus to avoid surprise.Warthog: The warthog is so aggressive, it continues to attack un¬til it reduced to ^7 hit points.Weasel: Weasels, related to minks and stoats, are common preda¬tors, ihough they are hunted for their pelts, or for pets.Wolverine; When engaged in battle, the wolverine becomes amost fearsome adversary giving it a +4 bonus to Us attack roll.Minimal Mammals; Minimals are half-sized breeds of otherwisenormal animals. They have the same physical and behavioraltraits of their full-sized relatives, although most are not danger¬ous. Minimals generally have one-half the number ot Hit Dicewith a corresponding drop in THACO, a +2 Armor Class penal¬ty, and a “2 Morale penalty. The damage caused by a minimal isone-half that of the full-sized relative.Giant Mammals; Giant mammals are double-sized breeds ofotherwise normal animals. They have the same physical and be¬havioral traits of their full-sized relatives. These giants generallyhave double the number of Hit Dice, a corresponding rise inTHACO, a -2 AC bonus, and a +2 Morale bonus. The damagecaused by the attacks of a giant mammal is twice that ol the toll-sized relative.
Herd animats live in all dimates and terrain, from freezing tun¬dra (bactrian camel) to temperate hills (wild cattle) to tropicalplains (antelope). Though normally passive, herd animals can bedangerous when angered or frightened.Herd animals are four-legged hoofed mammals covered withhair—thick fur for buffalo, curly wool for sheep, and short,coarse hair for camels, antelope, and sheep Male cattle, buffalo,antelope, and sheep have sharp horns. A camel's humps (onehum for dromedaries, two for bactrian) enable it to go withoutfood or water for up to two weeks.Combat: Most herd animals attack by biting. Buffalo defendthemselves with their horns, usually attacking if approached tooclosely (6' or less); if charging from a distance of at least 4Q J , abuffalo does 3-18 hp of impaling damage plus 1-4 hp of tramplingdamage. Nasty-tempered camels have a 50% chance of spittingat persons attempting to ride them or use them for pack animals;the victim of a spit attack has a 25% chance of being blinded for1-3 rounds. Cattle, antelope, and sheep generally flee from dan-ger. but will attack if cornered or threatened. A male antelope orsheep defending his herd will charge, inflicting 1-4 hp of buttingdamage if charging from at least 40\ Male cattle are 75% likelyto attack if intruders approach before the herd has a chance toescape.If frightened by intruders, there is a 25% that the entire herdwill stampede. If a herd stampedes, roll 2d4 for each creature inthe path of the stampede who does not take cover (such as byhiding in a tree or behind a rock pile or wall). This is the numberof herd animals trampling the exposed creature. Tramplingcauses either 1-4 hp oi damage {camel, cattle, antelope, andsheep' or 1-6 hp of damage {buffalo) per herd animal trampling.Habitat.Society: Herd animals graze on open terrain, migratingto a new territory when the food supply of the old has been de¬pleted Herd size varies from a family of four buffalo to a com¬mercial flock of 1 000 sheep. The largest and oldest male usuallyserves as the leader, directing the movement his herd and watch¬ing for predators. Herd animals do not collect treasure.Ecology: Herd animals eat grass, grains, and shrubbery. Theyare the favored prey of carnivores, including Hons, tigers, anddragons. Man often domesticates herd animals for their meat,milk, fur (blankets and clothing), and skin (shoes and tents).Dried droppings of herd animals can be burned for fuel.
Most small mammals are harmless to humans. Some have usefultraits or abilities. Most animals have only rudimentary languagesthat humanoids cannot use except with the aid of magical spells.All have THACO 20, except where noted below.Beavers quickly chew trees and construct homes in ponds.Adult pelts are worth two gp.Ermines are related to weasels. The white, spotted pelt is worthfour gp.Ferrets are related to weasels. If captured as cubs or raiseddomestically ferrets may be trained to perform simple tricks,retrieve objects, or hunt small burrowing game.Foxes have superb vision, hearing, and noses. Their pelts areworth three to five gp.Gophers live in large colonies burrowed into the soil of theplains. They have acute senses of hearing and smell. For eachgopher encountered, another IdlO are hiding in the burrowsnearby.Hedgehogs are covered with sharp but harmless quills.Moles have an excellent ability to detect tastes and vibrations,but very poor vision.Monkey refers to a variety of small, non-hostile species(rhesus, spider, tamarind, lemurs, and others). THACO 19.Minks are related to weasels. The pelt is worth three gp.Muskrats have a moderately valuable pelt worth five sp.Otters are fast runners (12) and swimmers (IS), They arefriendly and only attack if cornered or if their young arethreatened. Pelts are worth two to three gp. Giant otters areidentical except for their size (IQ'-IS' long). Pelts are worth1/000-4,000 gp, THACO 19 (sea and giant otters).Pigs may bite or attempt to stun, then crush a victim bybutting. Domestic pigs are normally harmless unless angered ormagically controlled. Wild pigs are domestic pigs that haveescaped to the wild. They are smaller (2 feet long) andnon aggressive unless provoked. THACO 19,Rabbits are difficult to surprise or catch due to their sensitiveeyesight, hearing, nose, and natural paranoia.Raccoons only attack if cornered or rabid (10% chance). Thepelts are worth one gp.Flying Squirrels have furry membranes that enable them toglide five feet lor each one foot they drop.Giant black squirrels are 2-foot-iong residents ofevil-dominated forests. They steal loose, small valuables (rings,gems, vials) to decorate their nests, THACO 19.Woodchucks are capable of quickly gnawing through trees orwood. The pelts are worth 1 gp.2-5/2-5/1-4 {daw/claw tail),or by weapon and 2-5/ MThese horrors, sometimes called tlincaUis, are part human andpart scorpion. A manscorpion has a dark-skinned human torso,its abdomen is protected by bony plates, and its ribs and back¬bone protrude from the body. Their hands have two thick fingersand a long thumb; the hands are often mistaken for scorpion-likedaws. The creatures are hairless, and their faces are handsomeand noble, except for the red, glowing eyes which have no pupils.The creature's torso sits atop a 4-foot-long, bony-plated,arachnoid body which is supported by six legs. Bony plate com¬pletely covers the strong legs. The protruding spine continuesalong the abdomen and forms a tail 10 feet long, The lower body,legs, and tail are usually sand-colored, and blend easily with thedeserL Observers rarely see anything but the muscular humantorso until the manscorpions are close.The origins of these creatures is thought to lie in an ancientcurse placed on evil humans They speak their own language,and 20% also speak some locally spoken tongue.Combat: Most manscorpions have low to average intelligence;they patrol their territory in squads of six warriors. A squadleader and a spellcaster. each with 9 HD and greater intelligence,are also present. The spellcaster has the abilities of a 4th-leveJcleric or mage. Fully 50% of them carry obsidian-studded clubs(treat as a battle axe) and bolas or javelins. The rest use only theirnatural weapons.When directed by the squad leader, manscorpions attack in anorganized manner. They use long-range attacks before closing formelee. In dose combat, they attack with weapon, daw, and tail,or with tail and two claws. The tail can strike anywhere nearby,including in front of the creature. When not being used for at¬tack, the tail sweeps the area behind the manscorpion, checkingfor obstacles and assailants. Anyone struck by the tail's spurmust make a successful saving throw vs. poison or die in 2d4rounds. Victims suffer weakness For one round (^2 attack penal¬ty), start to shake in the next round (“3 attack penalty and noDexterity bonus to AC), then convulse (AC 10 and no attackspossible) until they die.Common manscorpions lose organization and their morale isreduced without a leader, When morale is reduced to 1 or 2 hitpoints, common manscorpions go into a stinging frenzy, makingtwo tail attacks per round, but no other attacks.Patrols are more common near the manscorpion lair, which isguarded by a swarm consisting of three squads. A swarm leaderand a spellcaster, each with 10 Hit Dice, accompany a swarm.The spellcaster is the equivalent of a 7th-levei priest or wizard*These leaders stay out of combat, directing the action and castingspells. Swarms are sent on patrol in times of trouble.For every two swarms, there is a noble and a sorcerer. Theystay near the lair unless an army of manscorpions is marching,then they will lead two swarms. These leaders have 11 HD, andsorcerers cast spells at 9th-level ability.Finally every lair has a king or queen, or both, with 12 HitDice* A high cleric, also with 12 HD, aids these rulers with theabilities of an llth-level priest. They always remain in the lairand wilt only fight if directly threatened.Habitat/Society: Manscorpions live under the desert sands inburrows connected by tunnels, all situated above undergroundcities of 40-400 individuals. These often mirror great human cit¬ies. with pits instead of buildings, and great chasms like invertedpyramids*Manscorpions often hold humans and dwarves as slaves, usingthem to mine and create weaponry* A manscorpions fingers arenot very dexterous, but they are fine sculptors with hammer andchisel, and many sculptures decorate their cities.Ecology: Manscorpions eat practically any meat, including carri¬on. No normal creatures prey on them.
The manticore is a true monster, with a leonine torso and legs,bat I ike wings, a mans head, a tail tipped with iron spikes, and anappetite for human flesh.The manticore stands 6 feet tall at the shoulder and measures15 feet in length. It has a 25-foot wingspan. Each section of themanticore closely resembles the creature it imitates. The leoninetorso has a tawny hide, the mane is a lion's brown-black color,and the batlike wings are a dark brow n with sparse hair. All man-ticores have heads that resemble human males; the mane resem¬bles a heavy beard and long hairCombat; The manticore first fires a volley of 1-6 tail spikes (180yard range as a light crossbow'). Each spike causes 1-6 points ofdamage. The manticore can fire four such volleys each day (thespikes regrow quickly). Next, the manticore closes with its preyand attacks with its front claws and sharp teeth. In an outdoorsetting, the manticore tries to stay in the air to minimize itschance of being attacked. It is a clumsy flier, however, and can¬not use its teeth in the air.Habitat Society; Manticores are found in any climate but pre¬fer warm lands to cool ones. This reflects the wide climate rangeof their favorite food, humans. A manticores territory may cov¬er 20 or more square miles and includes at least one human settle¬ment. Such territories usually overlap with those of othermanticores and other man-eating predators like dragons,Manticores mate for life. The male remains with the femaleduring gestation and hunts for her. Manticores bear one or twocubs which grow rapidly to adulthood in five years. Cubs arebom with 1 Hit Die and gain an additional one each year. In theirfirst year, cubs lack flying ability but they are still small enoughfor an adult to grasp in its forelegs. There is a 20% chance a she-manticores lair holds cubs under one year old. Cubs up to twoyears inflict one point of damage per front paw and 1-2 pointswith their bite. Cubs 3-4 years old inflict 1-2, L-2, and 1-6 pointsof damage.Manticore cubs can be caught and trained to assist evil hu¬mans. Such training is difficult and dangerous, especially sincedomesticated adults have an 80% chance of reverting to a wildstate, Manticores will not allow themselves to be used as mounts.Wild adults may voluntarily ally themselves with evil humans,provided such allies can provide them with a steady ample foodsupplyManticores normally eat their prey where they kill it. Malessometimes haul slain prey back to their mates or drag still-livingprey to their lairs for the cubs to practice killing.Manticores collect their victims* valuables for a variety of rea¬sons, including curiosity emulation of other monsters who col¬lect treasure, the man-scent on the things, or because they knowhumans value the things and therefore might come looking forthem. Their lack of real hands prevents most manticores fromusing what magical items fall into their possession. However,manticores that have allied with evil humans may possess magi¬cal items designed specifically for their use. Examples includemagical collars or bracelets that are, m effect, oversized magicalrings.Ecology; Manticores are wide-ranging carnivores that havesuccessfully survived in every region inhabited by humans,whether in the wilderness or underground. They are nightmarishopponents but invaluable allies if conditions are right. A manti¬cores pelt is a mark of the most powerful hunters and warriors.An intact, cured manticore hide complete with wings is worth10,000 gp,
Medusae are female humanoids with hair of swarming snakes.They are hateful creatures that can petrify any creature thatmeets their gaze.The typical medusa has a pale-skinned, very shapely woman'sform. It stands 5 to 6 feet tall with the snakes adding up to an¬other foot. At distances farther than 30 feet, the medusa is easilyconfused with a normal woman. Its red-glowing eyes are visibleup to 30 feet. At distances of 20 feet or closer, the medusa's truenature is revealed. Its face is horrible—the snakes writhe con¬stantly especially if the medusa is excited.Medusae wear human clothing such as loose dresses or robes.They seldom wear armor and cannot easily wear helmets. Medu¬sae may carry a knife, dagger, or short bow. Medusae speak theirown tongue and the common one.Combat: The medusa tries to get dose to a victim before it re¬veals its true nature. It will use Its attractive body to kre malesnearer while staying in the shadows. Once the medusa is within30 feet, it strikes, trying to get its victim to look into its eyes, Anycreature within 30 feet must make a saving throw versus petrifi¬cation or turn instantly to lifeless stone. If an opponent averts hiseyes, the medusa rushes up so that its serpentine growths can at¬tack, The range of such attacks is only 1 foot, but the victim mustsave versus poison or die.The medusa is able to see creatures in the Ethereal and Astralplanes, and its petrifying gaze is equally as effective against crea¬tures there. It retains its petrifying gaze after death. Creatureslooking at a freshly-dead medusa's head make a saving throw at+ 1. The saving throw increases +1 each day the head decays.If the medusa cannot easily use its normal tactics, it may resortto normal weapons such as knives and shortbows.Habitat Society: Medusae dwell in dark caves or the lower re¬gions of large abandoned buildings. They arrange the lightingsuch that their homes are filled with flickering shadows.The presence of petrified victims is a sure indicator of the occu¬pant s true nature. For this, aesthetic, and other reasons, the me¬dusa usually removes most of its victims. Those that resembleinteresting statues maybe retained; the rest are often broken intounrecognizable (and unrevivable) chunks.The one form of treasure never found in a medusa's lair is amirror If a medusa sees its own reflection in a mirror, it turns tostone itself. Reflection in nonmetallic reflectors such as water orpolished stone have no such effect. Medusae arc immune to thepetrifying effect of another medusa.Medusae are infrequently driven to mate with humanoidmales. The act always ends in the male's death, usually by petrifi¬cation when the medusa reveals its previously hidden visage.Two to six eggs are laid one month later and hatch eight monthsafter that. The female hatchlings appear as baby girls with stub¬by green tendrils. The hatchlings are revolting to look at but can¬not petrify. Medusae grow at the same rate as humans. At aboutage two the serpentine hair becomes alive and gains its poisonousbite. The medusa can petrify with the onset of adolescence.Rare medusae {10% J have serpentine bodies in place of the lowertorso and legs. The entire body is covered with fine scales andmeasures 10 to 20 feet. The poison of these medusae is so deadlythat saving throws are made at -1, and they are known to usebows and poisoned arrows. Their blood is so poisonous, in fact,that even after one has been killed, touching its body still re¬quires a saving throw versus poison. They seldom venture farfrom their lairs, since they are immediately recognizable. Greatermedusae have a morale bonus of +1.Maedar are male counterparts to medusae, though they lack thepetrifying gaze of the females.The typical maedar is a muscular, hairless humanoid male,usually dressed in a kilt or tunic.Combat: Maedar attack with powerful fists that each cause 2d4points of damage. One every three turns, the maedar can turnstone to flesh by touch. Maedar can pass through stone at theirnormal movement rate. They require one round of concentrationbefore this; no other activity can be undertaken that round,Maedar struck by a phase door spell while passing through stoneare killed instantlyMaedar are immune to petrifaction and paralyzation (includ¬ing related spells, such as hold and s/om). They are immune tothe poisonous bite of a medusa's serpentine hair. In addition,maedar can see into and extend their stone into flesh power intothe Astral and Ethereal planes.Habitat/Society: Maedar are the little-known male version of themedusae. They are extremely rare, however (far more rare thanthe frequency would indicate), and few medusae ever find amaedar spouse. Most medusae typically mate with human males.This cross produces two to six eggs that hatch into fledgling,human-like females, who mature into medusae. The cross insuresthe continuation of the medusae species.When a medusa finds and mates with the extremely raremaedar the eggs hatch into human infants, 25% male and 75%female. Only 2% of the males bom of these matings are actuallymaedar; the remaining males and all the females are normal hu¬man infants who die at the sight of their mother.The typical maedar is a monogamist who mates for life; he isfiercely devoted to his mate and will go to any length to assist oravenge her. A widowed maedar will pursue his mate's killer foryears.Because of the Maedar's rarity and natural redusiveness, evenmost sages are unaware of their existence. Maedar are rarelyseen; generally they remain in the lair they share with a medusamate. A maedar's magical power provides food for him and hismate. He smashes her petrified victims, then transforms them in¬to meat.Ecology; Maedar may cooperate with lawful evil creatures,such as kobolds and ores, in exchange for security or reward, Liforced to aid another creature, maedar seek revenge at the firstopportunity.Glyptars are rock crystals animated by the spirits of maedar.When a maedar has foreknowledge of his death, he can transfer hislife force into the rocks. An extremely evil maedar retains his con¬sciousness as it drifts through the ground. When such a life forceencounters gemstones, such as feldspar or amethyst, it is trappedwithin and cannot leave voluntarily. Eventually the maedar goesmad, (Note that once a maedar is trapped within a glyptar crystal,his life force cannot be trapped in a second crystal.)If this glyptar is removed intact from the ground, the maedar'sspirit is now able to animate the crystal and anything inorganicattached to it. Thus if the glyptar is set in the eye of a stonestatue, the maedar's life force animates It as a golem. This canaffect a maximum of 1,000 pounds.Similarly, it the glyptar is set in the pommel of a sword, thesword can be animated to strike as though it were wielded by theliving maedar. The weapon gains a +1 bonus to its attack roll,strikes as if it were wielded by a bthdevel fighter, and gains a +2bonus to its damage roll. Note that the glyptars sfpne to fieshpower enables the weapon to sink harmlessly into stone as theglyptar uses its power.The glyptar retains its other powers as well. The glyptar andits attachments may pass through stone at will at the normalmovement rate. It is immune to phase door spells. Once everythree turns the glyptar can perform a stone to flesh attack againsta target touched by the glyptar or its setting. Glyptars remainimmune to paralyzation and petrification attacks of all sorts.
Mermen are marine-dwelling. amphibious humanoids with theupper torso of a human and the lower torso of a fish.Mermen were once human but were transformed by unknownpowers into their current forms. They live by herding fish, butduring times of need they attack other sea-peoples or ocean¬going vessels. They live underwater but surface to sun them¬selves on large rocks.Adult mermen are 5 to 6 feet long (tall) and weigh between 150and 225 pounds. Their skin tone is fair to tan, hair color is usu¬ally dark brown (occasionally fair), while their scale color rangesfrom green to silver, Females, also known as mermaids, are 6inches shorter than the males and weigh between 100 to 150pounds. Mermen adorn themselves with coral and shell decora¬tions. Mermen speak their own language (with different dialectsspoken by communities that are separated over wide distances),and 50% of all communities also speak locathah.Combat: Mermen communities are well-armed. The arms usedby mermen are as follows;* 20% of all trident wielders are also armed with a hook andgrappling line (50 feet long).Mermen crossbows have a range of 30 yards underwater. Theyuse grapples to attack ships; the grapples can be thrown up to 50teeL Each grapple held by 10 mermen slows a ship by 1. Oncestopped, the ship is attacked and a hole is knocked in its hull in4d4 rounds, after which the ship slowly sinks, to be looted by themermen.Habitat/Society: For every 20 mermen encountered, there is apatrol leader (2-3 HD) and 1-3 barracuda (AC 6; Move 30; HD 3;#AT 1; Dmg2d4). For every 40 mermen, there is a leader (4 HD).For every 120 mermen encountered, there is one chief (6 HD i andtwo guards (4 HD). For every ten mermen, there is a 10% chanceof a shaman (3 HD, with the spells of a 3rd-level priest).Mermen have regular undersea communities, usually a reef orcliff honeycombed with passages. Rarely (10% of the time) theyconstruct a village from sea shells and coral. An average commu¬nity has between 100 and 600 males. Females and sub-adults eachequal 100% of the males in a village. The communities are usu¬ally guarded by 3d6 trained barracudas.Mermen society is heavily patriarchal. They prefer to be left tothemselves and usually reject proposals of friendship or trade.They have strong territorial instincts and, while closely related tohumans, they have no love for them. Males hunt and herd fishand protect their territory. Females raise children and tend to do¬mestic affairs. Mermaids aie also known for their creativity, andthey produce works of art for the community (shell carvings, sea¬weed tapestries, and songs).Ecology: Mermen are omnivorous, but they prefer a diet offish, lobster, crab, and shellfish. They do not cook these crea¬tures, but must fillet them before eating. They can survive out ofwater for one hour before they begin to dehydrate. When dehy¬drated, they lose 2 hit points per hour and will die when theyreach 2ero; immersion in fresh or salt water immediately restoresthese lost hit points.Mermen have an average life expectancy of 150 years. Mermenhave many natural enemies but particularly hate the sahuaginand ixitxachitl. They often dash with tritons over territory.
Mimics are magically-created creatures with a hard rock-likeouter shell that protects their soft inner organs. Mimics can altertheir form and their pigmentation; they use this talent to lure vic¬tims into close range, where they attempt to feed on them. Theyusually appear in the form of treasure chests. There are two vari¬eties. the smaller, more intelligent common mimic, and the larg¬er, less intelligent killer mimic.Mimics are large. Common mimics occupy about 150 cubicfeet (a 3' x 6' x 8' chest, or a large door frame). Killer mimicsoccupy about 200 cubic feet. Mimics' natural color is a speckledgrey that resembles granite. Mimics can alter their pigmentationto resemble varieties of stone (such as marble!, wood grain, andvarious metals (gold, silver, copper); it takes one round to makethe desired alteration. They cannot lose mass in this transforma-tion (they must remain the same size, though they may radicallyalter their dimensions).Common mimics have their own tongue (corruptions of theoriginal language spoken by their wizard creators) and can alsobe taught to speak in common and other languages. Killer mimicsare incapable of speech.Combat; A mimic can surprise its victims easily (-4 penalty tovictims' surprise rolls). When a creature touches a mimic, it lash¬es out with a pseudctpod that inflicts 3d4 points of damage. Fur¬thermore. the mimic covers itself with a glue-like substance. Anycreature or item that touches a mimic is held fast. Alcohol willweaken the glue in three rounds, enabling the character to breakfree, or the character may attempt to make an open doors roll tobreak free. Only one attempt may be made per character, and noother action, offensive or defensive, may be performed duringthe round that the attempt is being made. A mimic may neutral¬ize its glue at any time that it desires; the glue dissolves fiverounds after the mimic dies. The mimic is immune to add attacksand is unaffected by molds, green slime, and various puddings.Habitat Society; Mimics live underground, where they canavoid sunlight. They are solitary creatures; this is to ensure thateach mimic has a large grazing area. They have no culture: theirprimary concerns are survival and food. Common mimics arequite intelligent and will gladly offer information in exchange forfood. Killer mimics attack regardless of attempts at communica¬tion. Mimics have no moral code and no interest in culture orreligion. Wizards who use them as guardians have sometimesfound them to be less than enthusiastic about obeying their com¬mands.Ecology: Mimics were originally created by wizards to protectthemselves from treasure hunters. A good meaJ (one or two hu¬mans) can sustain them for weeks. They reproduce by fission andgrow to full size in several years. Mimics pose as stonework,doors, statues, stairs, chests, or other common items made fromstone, wood, and metal. Their skin is covered with optical sen¬sors that are sensitive to heat and light in a QD-tool radius, even inpitch darkness. Any powerful light source can easily blind them,including direct sunlight. Along with glue, they can excrete a liq¬uid that smells like rotting meat; this attracts smaller, more com¬mon prey (usually rats). Mimic ichor is useful in the creation ofpolymorph self potions, and their glue and solvent sacs can besold to alchemists. Other internal organs are useful in the manu¬facture of perfumes. The mimics internal organs are consideredtasty delicacies in some cultures.
Champion 053 + special$.000 (7,000 for psionic version)The illithid. or mind flayer, is an evil and Feared creature of the Under-dark; its powers are formidable and it feeds on the brains of any creatureit encounters. Using arcane powers, it enslaves or destroys its foes, whichinclude such powerful creatures as drow and kuo-toa.Mind Flayers stand about 6 Feet fall and have hideous mauve skin thatglistens with slime. The head resembles an octopus, with white eyes [nopupits are evident) and four tentacles around its mouth, a round, many-toothed orifice like that of a lamprey. The creature has three reddish fin¬gers and a thumb on each hand.flliih ids have infra vision. They can communicate with any creaturesvia innate telepathy: they have no spoken language, although they oftenaccompany their thoughts with hissing, and the eager lashing of trheir ten¬tacles. Mind flayers dress in Flowing robes, often with high, stiff collars,adorned with symbols of death and despair,Combat A mind flayers preferred method of attack is the tnitjrf blast, pro¬jected in a cane 60 feet long, 5 fee! wide at the mind (layer, and 20 feet wide atthe opposite end. All withm the cone must make a saving throw vs. wands orbe stunned and unable to act for 3d4 rounds. The iUithid tries to grab one ortwo stunned victim* (requiring normal attack rolls if others by to preventthis) and escape with them.The illithid keeps some victims as slaves and feeds on the brains of theothers. When devouring the brain of a stunned victim, it inserts its tenta¬cles into the victim s skull and draws out its brain, killing the victim inone round, A mind flayer can also use its tentacles in combat; it does soonly when surprised or when attacking a single, unarmed victim, A ten¬tacle which hits causes 2 hp damage and holds the victim. A tentacle doesno damage while holding, and can be removed with a successful bendbars lifi gates roll. Once all four tentacles have attached to the Victim,the mind flayer has found a path to the brain and kills the victim in oneround. If preferred, the DM can simply roil 1d4 for the number of roundsrequired to kill a struggling victim,A mind flayer can also use the following arcane powers, one perround, as a 7tb-level mage: suggestion, charm person charm monster,ESP levitate , astral projection, and plane shift. All saving throws againstthese powers are made al a *4. due to the creatures mental prowessIf an encounter is going against a mind flayer it will immediately flee,seeking to save itself regardless of its treasure or its fellowsHabitat Society; Mind flayers hate sunlight and avoid it when possible.They live in underground cities of 200 to 2,000 illithids* plus at least twoslaves per i]]fthjd. All the slaves are under the effects of a charm person orcharm monstar, and obey their illithid masters without question.The center of a community is its elder-brain, a pool of briny fluid thatcontains the brains of the city's dead mind flayers. Due to the mentalpowers of dlithids the elder-brain b still sentient, and the telepathic un¬ion of its brains rules the community. The elder-brain has a telepathicrange of 2 to 5 miles, depending emits age and size* It does not attack, buttelepathically warns the mmd flayers of the presence of thinking crea¬tures so a mind flayer within its telepathic radius can be surprised onlyby nonrintelligent creatures The range of the elder-brain determines theterritory claimed and defended by the community though raiding partiesare sent far beyond this limit*Mind fiayeTs have no family structure. Their social activities include eat¬ing. communicating with the elder-bra in, and debating on the best tactics toconquer the Underdark. For amusement, they inflict pain on their captivesand force slaves to fight in gladiatorial gameMind ttayer& are arrogant, viewing all other species only as cattle to befed upon. They prefer to eat the brains of thinking creatures,Ecolugy: Mind flayers live about 125 years They are warm-blooded am¬phibians. and spend the first 10 years of life as tadpoles, swimming In theelder-brain pool until they either die (which most do) or grow into adultillithids On an irregular basis, adult illithids feed brains to the tadpoles,which do not molest the elder-brain, Illithids are hermaphroditic; eachcan produce one tadpole twice in its life.Mind flayer ichor is an effective ingredient in a potion of ESP.Psionic flayers, considered the only true illithids by some (includingthemselves), have most of the same statistics and abilities as other mindflayers. Instead of magic-based abilities, however, theirs are purely psi¬onic. Psionic mind Flayers have a beak-like mouth and disdain the stiff*collared robes preferred by their cousins,Illithids use psionics for attack, mind control, and travel. All psionic il-Jithids have at least the following powers;• Psychokinesis - Devotions: control body levitation.• Psychomelaholism ■ Scieuo6$ body equilibrium ttheir only psycho*metabolic power).• Psychoporialion - Sciences; probability travel, teleport. Devotion^astral projection,• Telepathy - Sciences: domination mind I ink Devotions; awe, con¬tact, ESP, ego whip, id insinuation, post-hypnotic suggestion.
2-S/2-8 or I-4/by weapon typeGrapple, charge+ 2 bonus on surprise rollNilMinotaurs are either cursed humans or the offspring of mmo~taurs and humans. They usually dwell Ln underground laby¬rinths, for they are not confused in these places, which givesthem an advantage over their prey,Minotaurs are huge, well over 7 feet tall, and quite broad andmuscular. They have the head of a bull but the body of a humanmale. Their fur is brown to black while their body coloring variesas would a normal human's* Clothing is minima!, usually a loindoth or skirt.Combat: Minotaurs are very strong (equivalent humanStrength of 18). Against man-sized opponents (minimum 6 feettall) they may butt for 2-8 points of damage. Against smaller op¬ponents, they bite for 1-4 points of damage. If a minotaur Is 30feet or more from its opponent, it can lower its head and chargeagainst any creature that is at least 6 feet tall. II successful, thecharge causes double head-butt damage. In addition to these at¬tacks, most minotaurs also carry weapons—a huge axe (treat as ahalberd) or flail, with which it inflicts normal damage +2.Minotaurs are not particularly intelligent, but are extremelycunning and have excellent senses. They have a +2 bonus ontheir surprise rolls, have infra vision, and can track prey by scentlike a ranger* with 50% accuracy. They always pursue an unfa¬miliar scent. Minotaurs are immune to maze spells. They attackany intruder without fear, and will retreat only if the creature isobviously beyond their ability to defeat (+3 to morale score incombat).Habitatsodety: Minotaurs live in communities of up to eightmembers. If the community contains more than six minotaurs,one will be an elder minotaur with 18^50 Strength and 8 + 4 HitDice. The minotaur elder is the clan leader ; he remains in the cen¬ter of the labyrinth and raises young minotaurs while othershunt. He is always encountered in the center of a labyrinth.A minotaurs labyrinth is rarely natural. Often an evil wizardor a tyrant will construct a labyrinth and place the minotaur fam¬ily there, feeding it prisoners and slaves on a regular basis.Occasionally this tyrant will be killed and the minotaursforced to fend for themselves; since creatures rarely enter a laby¬rinth on their own accord, these minotaurs will usually be raven¬ously hungry,Minotaurs speak their own primitive language and are 25%likely to speak a halting form of common. They have little cul¬ture; their lives resemble animals more than humans. Their cul¬ture venerates physical strength above all else and particularlystrong human fighters have been known to earn their respect.They worship crude gods and have weak clerics (maximum 3rd-level shaman). Rumors persist of more intelligent minotaurs withdeveloped societies.Ecology: The curse which creates minotaurs is unknown* butsages suspect it involves "crimes against the natural order*" Mino¬taurs are always male. It is also said that the first minotaur wasoriginally a great and ill-tempered human fighter; he wanted tobe as strong as a bull and his wish was granted in the most hid¬eous manner possible, Minotaurs breed with human females toproduce offspring, which are male minotaurs. Minotaurs have alifespan of 200 years, They can live without food for years at alime, but are always hungry unless they are fed regularly. Theyare meat-eaters, but their curse causes them to prefer a diet ofhuman flesh. Those transformed into minotaurs by curses maybe restored to human form by a unsh, but those who were bomas minotaurs cannot be made human. Gnolls are their naturalenemies; they will kill each other on sight*Minotaur components are sometimes used in spells and po¬tions, and might be used in magical items involving strength* lo¬cation* and misdirection.
The crimson death is a malevolent, vaporous creature that feedson the bodily fluids of its victims.The body of the crimson death is a humanoid-shaped cloud ofpale color. It is difficult to distinguish if seen against fog andnearly invisible to tnf ravision. During this time, the creature hasan initiative bonus of + 4. When the creature is fed, it develops acrimson flush that is easily visible by normal or infra vision. Thecloud possesses humanoid features The fingers elongate into ten¬tacles when it is feeding. Because of its behavior, sages believethat a Crimson Death Mist is the result of the actual death of avampire.The crimson deaths language is a barely audible series of whis¬pers. It can communicate with other vaporous beings such as airelemental^. It communicates with humanoids only if it is theircaptive.Combat: The monster attacks only to feed or defend itself. Itsurrounds its victim with vaporous tentacles. Whenever it hitsthe tentacles drain bodily fluids and cause 3dlQ points of dam¬age.The creature is normally immaterial (AC 0) and can be struckonly by magical weapons of + 2 or better. After feeding, the crea¬ture attains solidity (AC 4) for six turns. At this time the creatureturns red, moves more slowly (FI 6), and can be struck by magi¬cal weapons of +1 or better.When a crimson death dies, it immediately dissipates into theair while its undigested fluids fall to the ground in a grotesqueshower.The crimson death is able to carry loads by levitating anythingsurrounded by its vaporous mass. Despite its vaporous naturethe crimson death possesses strength equal to a normal human. Itis able to carry a passive weight equal to an adult human. If itattempts to pick up a struggling victim, it must make a successfulattack roll for each round it carries the person. Failure means theperson drops to the ground (suffering damage appropriate to theheight of the fall}.Habitat.Society: The crimson death dwells in the bogs andmarshes where chill and damp prevail. The creature is nearly in¬visible in its native habitat.The crimson death is a secretive creature, It prefers to feed onsolitary beings, since these are easy lo sneak up on and have noallies to lend them support. If several people are present, thecrimson death tries to pick off the guard while the others sleep; itthen feeds on the others at its leisure. In order to conceal Its pres¬ence, the crimson death disposes of corpses in its lair or a deepbog.It maintains a lair in a thicket, undercut bank, or a hollowspace under a windfall. There the monster stores the valuables itcollects from its victims. These can be used as bribes for human¬oid allies or bait for intended victims. The lair may also containthe remains of past victims.The crimson death prefers to feed on humanoids. It normallyrequires one victim per week. If more people are available, themonster may feed continuously until destroyed or driven off.Legends tell of a connection between crimson deaths and vam¬pires. One tale suggests that, when an undead vampire is de¬stroyed, its spirit is transformed into a crimson death. Anothertale suggests that, when a vampire is created, the monsters lostsoul is reborn elsewhere as a crimson death. This legend also sug¬gests that a vampire may be restored to normal lif e it it is rejoinedby its crimson death counterpart. A third legend says that ex¬tremely evil air elemental are condemned and cast out into thePrime Material plane in the forms of crimson deaths.Ecology: The crimson death is a dangerous predator that roamsthe swamps like a living ghost. A crimson death can be collectedand imprisoned in an airtight container. This does not harm it. Acrimson death in such a container may be mistaken for, or mis¬labeled as, a bottled djtnn or magical vapor. If someone releasesthe crimson death- the starving creature immediately attacks itsunwitting rescuer.Crimson deaths are aware of the advantages of alliances. Theymay agree to cooperate with evil humanoids who can providethem with a steady supply of victims. They make excellent alliesfor those dwelling in or near their lairs.
These gaseous monsters prey on all living creatures, envelopingthem with their gaseous tendrils, then draining their blood farfood.Vampiric mists appear as thick, billowing clouds, 5 to 8 feet indiameter. Color ranges from pale pink when hungry to crimsonred when sated, Vampiric mists speak no language, but they com¬municate through a limited form of telepathy. These creaturesreek of old blood and are often smelled before seen.Combat: Vampiric mists automatically sense the presence otany warm-blooded creature within 50 feet. Hungry mists take theshortest route possible to the victim, navigating by touch, flow¬ing easily over water or through narrow cracks. Their path canbe blocked by nonporous obstacles, but vampiric mists are intel¬ligent and if any reasonable path exists they will find it.All vampiric mists have maximum hit points (8 per die) whenfull, but they are almost never encountered in this state. For each12 hours a mist goes unfed, it loses 1 hit point. Vampiric mistswhose hit point totals reach 0 due to starvation die. To regain hitpoints vampiric mists must drain fresh blood from living victims(hence the mists name). For each 2 hit points of blood drained,the mist regains 1 hit point.A vampiric mist may attack one victim per round by reachingout with a gaseous tendril. Targets of a vampiric mist are treatedas AC 10. Modify this number by the victim's Dexterity, and bythe magical protection worn (+ 1 ( +2, etc.) but ignore magicalshields. The touch of a vampiric mist drains ld8 points of blood.A hit 4 above the needed to hit number means the mist has envel¬oped its victim. Enveloped victims are automatically hit eachround until either the mist dies, finishes feeding, or retreats. At¬tacks by other characters against an enveloping vampiric mist di¬vide their damage evenly—half against the mist, half against thevictim. Only the enveloped victim may attack the mist withoutharm to himself. However, because of the disorienting effect ofrapid blood lass, enveloped victims may not use any spells ormagical devices that require concentration.While blood draining is mainly used to teed, the ability canalso be used in defense by sated vampiric mists. Extra blood issimply dumped upon the ground.Normally, a v ampiric mist is damaged only by magical weaponsor by spells that effect air. Lightning bolt and magic missile are alsoeffective. However, immediately after reaching maximum hitpoints a vampiric mist takes on substance. This substantial stagelast ld6 turns. During this time the mists movement rate slowsto 6, its AC drops to B, and it may be hit by normal weapons.Blood draining is not a form of regeneration; a mist that loseshit points in combat must heal those points normally. Keep trackof a mist s current hit points and its maximum possible for thatcombat (this total starts at 24 and goes down with damage causedto the mist). Each time the mist is wounded, reduce both the cur¬rent hit points and the maximum. If the current hit point totalever reaches 0. the mist dies. Hit points gained by draining bloodare added to the current hit points, which cannot exceed the max¬imum total (24 minus damage to the mist). Hit points lost due tostarvation are subtracted trom the current hit points only. Thecurrent hit points may never exceed the mist s maximum hit pointtotal. (After the current battle is over, the maximum hit pointtotals tor any surviving mists return to 24.)HabitatSodety: These dread monsters inhabit both swamps,where they creep along mixing in with morning and night tog,and subterranean caverns, where they stalk prey in absolutedarkness. Vampiric mists attack at night or early morning, flow¬ing over the ground in search of warm-blooded victims. Theyprefer lone victims, bul hungry mists sometimes raid towns atnight , slaying livestock and draining vict ims in their sleep, beforeslipping out at dawn.Ecology: First thought to be immature forms of crimson death,it is now known that these fiends were deliberately created by apowerful vampire wizard.Vampiric mists reproduce via division, A mist is 10% likely todivide during its substantial stage immediately after feeding. Thetwo mists created have 3 Hit Dice each, but only 4 hit points perdie (thus they are born ravenously hungry).Vampiric mists prey on all warm-blooded creatures. No ani¬mals hunt vampiric mist deliberately, though stirges, leeches, andother bloodsuckers are sometimes drawn (fatally! to their smell.Vampiric mists have no known life span. They live until theystarve, are slain, or reproduce.
Molds are a variety of spore-producing iungi that form in decay¬ing food or in warm, moist places. These fungi usually have awoolly or furry texture. While most molds are harmless, thereare (at leasts three varieties of monstrous molds that pose a dead¬ly threat to adventurers: brown, russet, and yellow mold.Brown mold is found in damp subterranean areas, such as ca¬verns and caves. It is Jight to golden brown in color. Brown moldfeeds by absorbing heat, even body heat; where brown moldgrows, the temperature is below average. Direct sunlight or ul¬tra violet light kills it.If a warm-blooded creature comes within 5 feet of a brownmold, the mold drains heat equal to 4d8 points of damage fromits victim, per round, A ring of warmth provides complete pro¬tection against this attack. Brown mold grows instantly fromheat. If a torch is used in its vicinity, it doubles in size; it flamingoil is used, it quadruples, and fireball-type spells cause it to groweight-fold.Brown mold is not Fed by cold light sources (e.g., %/rf, faeriefire). The only magic that affects it are disintegrate (which de¬stroys it), plant-affecting magic, and cold spells. Ice storms orwalls of ice cause it to go dormant for 5d6 turns. A cold wand ,white dragon breath, or a cone of cold kills it. Brown mold doesnot affect cold-using creatures such as white dragons, winterwolves, ice toads, etc.Russet mold is golden-brown to rust red in color. It has a lumpytexture similar to cold porridge, it is covered by short, hair-likegrowths that stand upright and wave as if they were in a coldbreeze. It resembles rust at distances beyond 30 feet (70% chanceof error). It is immune to weapons and most spells; it is affectedonly by alcohol, acid, and salt, which kill it: a cure disease or acontinual light spell also destroys it.Russet mold continuously emits a cloud of spores in a three-foot radius. All creatures in this cloud suffer 5d4 points of dam¬age (per round in the cloud) and must roll a successful savingthrow vs. poison or become infected with spore sickness Victim*of spore sickness are instantly paralyzed and die in 5d4 minutesunless a cure disease spell is cast on them.Anyone who dies from spore sickness undergoes a transforma¬tion and begins to sprout russet mold growths; when completelycovered in mold <ld4 + 20 hours), he becomes a mold man or ve-gepygmy, A hold plant spell will halt the growth of the mold forthe duration of the spelJ. while a cure disease spell destroys itwithin an hour after death- after that, a wish is necessary to de¬stroy it.This mold is pale yellow to golden orange in color. It touchedroughly, it may (50% chance) emit a cioud of spores in a 10-footradius. Any creature caught in this cloud must roll a successfulsaving throw vs, poison or die A cure disease spell and a resur¬rection spell within 24 hours are necessary to restore life.Fire of any sort destroys yellow mold. A continual light spellrenders it dormant for 2d6 turns.Yellow mold colonies of over 300 square feet are sometimessentient (1 in 6 chance). These molds sense creatures within 60feet, and may project their spores that distance. Twice per day,they may use a suggestion on someone within that radius; in ad¬dition to the saving throw r the victim must successfully roil anIntelligence check or lose 1 point of Intelligence permanently (it isdevoured by the mold) ,Metapsjonics: psionic sense [ldlOG+20 1 range, no cost).Only sentient yellow' molds (1 in 6 chance) have pssortic powers.Such creatures are also immune to psionic attacks unless the crea¬ture is being aided by one who aan communicate with plants.
Tropical or subtropicalmoist forests and cavernsVery* rareMold men* sometimes derogatorify called vegepygmies or evenmoldies, are short, bipedal fungus creatures. They have sharp,thorn-like daws, and leaf-like tendrils form a fringe on theirshoulders, abdomens, and limbs. A topknot of these tendrils sitsat the apex of a vegepygmy s head.The coloration of mold men matches their surroundings; forestmold men have brown skin and green tendrils, while those foundunderground might have gray skin and black tendrils. Mold menare lVi feet tall, plus 1/2-foot per Hit Die,Although they do not have a spoken language, vegepygmiesare capable of vocalized cries. They normally communicate bytapping on their chests and on trees or stones.Combat; Parties of mold men hunt near their lairs. In their hometerritory, mold men blend into their surroundings, so opponentsreceive a ~2 penalty to surprise rolls.Mold men will attack any form of animal Me for food. Thoughcapable of using their natural camouflage for ambush, they sel¬dom use other tricks or traps, preferring direct assault.Half of the mold men in a group have I HD. while 25% have 2HD, The rest are 3 or 4 HD (equal chances). For every 50 moldmen, there is a subchief with 5 HD and ld4 +1 bodyguards with 3HD each. Each tribe of mold men is led by a chief with 6 HD and2d4 bodyguards with 4 HD each.Half of the mold men encountered carry spears, while the oth¬ers use dubs or go without weapons (equal chances).Chiefs aho attack with spores; victims must make a savingthrow vs. poison or be paralyzed, dying in 5d4 minutes unlesstreated by a cure disease spell. Victims who die in this manner arereborn ld4 + 20 hours later as mold men with 4 HD. These indi¬viduals generally become the chiefs bodyguards.Attacks from piercing weapons cause only i point of damageto mold men. They are immune to electrical attacks, as well as allcharm spells except those which affect plants. Mold men alwaysreceive saving throws vs. enchantments, even if one is not nor¬mally allowed.About half of all of their hunting parties are accompanied by apack of thornies as well. Mold men settlements always hold 1-4packs of thornies (see thorny, under Plant, Dangerous).Habitat/Society: Mold men form primitive, settled tribes. Theirlairs are usually found in warm underground areas, though sometribes have lairs in the underbrush of deep, dark forests and jun¬gles. Tribes are very territorial.Mold men co-exist well with plant and fungus life. They oftenuse shriekers to guard their lairs, and mold men native to the laircan pass by those shriekers unnoticed. Russet mold is usuallyfound in the vicinity of a mold man lair as weJLNew mold men are created by russet mold, by their leaders'spore attacks, or by budding. The latter occurs only if food isplentiful. Russet molds produce 5 HD mold men. while leaderscreate 4 HD mold men, and normal budding produces I HDmold men.Mold men have been known to associate with my con ids,which view them as rustic cousins.Ecology: Mold men live by scavenging and hunting. They willeat meat in any condition, from fresh to carrion. In rimes of greatneed, they have been known to eat other mold men. or even my-conids, though they seldom attack members of their own or anallied tribe.
1-4(1 HD). 1-6 (2 HD), 1-6 (3HD), MO (4 HD) or byweapon typeNilMongrel men are a mixture of the blood of many species: h u¬mans, ores, gnolte, ogres, dwarves, hobgoblins, elves, bugbears,bullywugs, and many others. Their appearance varies greatly,combining the worst features of their parent stocks. They areusually dad in dirty rags: they are ashamed of their appearanceand try keep their bodies concealed, especially among strangers.They have no distinct tongue of their own. but speak a debasedcommon, mixed with grunts, whistles, growls, and gestures.Their names often mimic animal noises.Combat: Mongrelmen have three special abilities that helpthem to survive: mimicry pickpocketing, and camouflage.Mimicry enables them lo imitate the sounds made by any mon¬ster or creature they have encountered except for special attackforms (groaning spirits' death wail, for instance), which they can¬not imitate.Pickpocketing enables them to acquire items that they couldnot otherwise obtain (they have a 70% chance of successLCamouflage enables them to hide themselves and their itemswith great skill. The base chance of being unnoticed is 80%, andit requires one turn for camouflage to be performed. Each addi¬tional turn spent preparing the camouflage increases the chanceby 1 %, to a maximum of 95% (after 16 turns). Successfully cam¬ouflaged persons or items are not noticed unless they are movedor touched (or move themselves, in the case of creatures). Cam¬ouflaged buildings are usually unnoticeable or unrecognizable atranges greater than 50 feet (this varies with size and type of struc¬ture),Mongrelmen normally fight with dubs and swords, but 5% ofthe members of any group encountered are armed with blowgunsand poison or paralyzing darts.Habitat Society: For every 10 mongrelmen encountered, thereis at least one with 2 Hit Dice; lor every 30, there is one with 3 HitDice: and for every 40, there is one with 4 Hit Dice. In a com¬munity where they are not held as thralls, there are usually aleader (AC 4, Move 12, HD 5, Dmg ldl2, +1 bonus to attackroll) and five bodyguards (HD 4).Because of their appearance, mongrelmen are seldom welcomein any lawful or good society, and are usually enslaved or abusedby evil or chaotic groups. Thus mongrelmen are found as eitherslaves or serfs, working long hours for evil humans or human¬oids in a dismal community, or as refugees living in abandonedruins. Enslaved mongrelmen are not willing to rebeL but wait pa¬tiently for their masters to be destroyed by outside forces. Theyprefer to live an orderly day-to-day existence.A mongrelman prides itself in the ability to survive: they con¬sider the title "The Survivor" to be more esteemed than "TheGreat." For them, patience is a greater virtue than being good atthe arts of war A mongrelman performs acts at violence only inself-defense or (in the case of slaves) on the orders of their mas¬ters; free mongrelmen do not hesitate to kill anyone they believethreatens their community. They prefer to avoid contact withother creatures except in times of great need, when they try tosteal what they require (food, took, etc.).Free mongrelmen raise domestic game and grow fruits and veg¬etables, They have a long tradition of art, music, and literature.Their songs are a bizarre cacophony of animal songs mixed withmournful dirges and wails: a few sages consider them to be beau¬tiful, but most disagree.Ecology: Mongrelmen are omnivorous, but their teeth are mostefficient at eating meat. The life span of a free mongrelman isbetween 25 and 35 years; the average slave lives only 15 to 20years, Their infant mortality rate is very high. Their major ene¬mies are tribes of wandering humanoids that hunt them for sport.
Of all the creatures that inhabit the deep, only the fcraken exceedsthe morkoth in malice and cruelty. Also known as the ‘wraith o!the deep", the morkoth lurks in tunnels hoping to lure its victimsinto a trap from which they cannot escape.The descriptions given by those who have encounteredmorkoths contain considerable variation, so no one is certainwhat they really look like. They are usually said to resemble anintelligent fish with an octopus's beak. They are most frequentlydescribed as being between 5 to 6 feet long, inky black in color,with faint luminescent silver patches. They may have tins forarms and legs that vaguely resemble those of humans, and anumber of fins tor navigation and propulsion in the depths,Morkoths have infravision with a 90-foot range. They speaktheir own language.Combat: A morkoth attacks by snapping with its squid-likebeak, which inflicts IdlO points of damage. A morkoth lives atthe center of six spiraling tunnels, each of which leads to a centralchamber. These tunnels are narrow (only one size M creaturemay enter at a time, and no size U. As a victim passes over atunnel, he is drawn in by a hypnotic pattern, which leads himtoward the central chamber. As the victim is drawn into the cen¬tral chamber he approaches the morkoth without realizing it andmust roll a successful saving throw vs. spell with a -4 penalty orbe charmed. A charmed victim is devoured at the morkoths lei¬sure, If the morkoth doesn't charm the victim before he comeswithin 60 feet, the hypnotic effect of the tunnels is broken.A morkoth is highly resistant to magic. It reflects any spell thatis cast at it back to the caster, including spells with an area ofeffect. If a dispel magic is simultaneously cast with a spell, thereis a 50% chance the morkoth will be unable to reflect it, though itis entitled to a saving throw vs. the dispel,Habitat/Society: Morkoths are normally solitary creatures.They sometimes make alliances with kraken, offering their helpin exchange for an occasional slave. If approached by evil seahumanoids for assistance, morkoths may strike a bargain but of¬ten betray their ' allies ' at the most opportune moment,Morkoths rarely leave their tunnels. The tunnels are originallynatural, but are slowly carved over the course of centuries by themorkoths so that the central chamber grows larger. Morkothssometimes build their tunnels near hot air vents, so the water inmorkoth lairs may be warmer than normal.Morkoths realize that other intelligent creatures like treasure,so they collect belongings from the creatures they kill to use inbargaining with other creatures. They place no value on gold orgems or even magical items. Morkoths enjoy deception above allelse. They do not enslave their victims, if only because their ap¬petites are so fierce that slaves would not survive long.Ecology; According to the most popular theories, morkoths area species of fish with human and squid influences. Sages are un¬sure if this species occurred by chance or design, Morkoths arecarnivorous and will eat nearly any sea creature. Their usual dietis deep-water creatures such as sharks, octopi, kuo-toans, andsahuagin, The life spans of male morkoths are about 80 to 100years, while females die alter egg-laying.Once every ten years, a morkoth leaves its tunnels and wan¬ders the seas searching for a mate, leaving a distinctive odor trailthat is easy for morkoths to identify and follow, After mating,the male morkoth returns to Its tunnels and the female lays aclutch of about 25 eggs, which she buries in the ocean floor, Shethen dies. The eggs hatch in two months, and the immaturemorkoths struggle to survive, instinctively searching for vacanttunnels. Most hatchlings die on this journey,After six months, a young morkoth is mature enough to sur¬vive (it now has 2 hp/HD, for 14 hit points). It grows into a full-sized, exceptionally intelligent morkoth adult by its fifth year.
Muckdwellers are a species of small intelligent bipedal amphib¬ians that lurks in swamps, marshes, or still, mud-bottomed wa¬ters, They have been known to serve lizard men and kuo-toa.Muckdwellers are only 1-foot tall and resemble upright gilamonsters with large, partially webbed rear feet. Their Forepawsare prehensile, but very small and weak. Their backs are coloreda mottled gray and brown, and their underbellies are yellow.They have short tails that are used for swimming and keepingtheir balance on land. They speak their own hissing language andpossibly 150% chance) the lizard man tongue.Combat: Muckdwellers use ambush techniques. Packs ofmuckdwellers wait for a victim: when one arrives, several squirtwater (at up to a ten-yard rangel into the victim's eyes, whichtemporarily blinds it (a successful saving throw vs, wands ne¬gates this, but surprised creatures get no saving throw). A blind¬ed victim cannot act in that round, loses all Dexterity bonuses,and all attacks against the victim gain a +2 bonus to the attackroll* Furthermore, if the muckdwellers lure the victim into knee-deep muddy waters, the victim loses all Dexterity bonuses andfights with a T penalty to its attack roll, due to unsteady ground.If the water is waist-high, the penalty increases to -2; if the wateris chest-high, the penalty is -3. A ring of free action or equivalentmagic negates these penalties. These disadvantages do not applyto the amphibious muckdwellers. Usually, a muckdweller fightsonly if it is cornered or if it is certain it can score an easy kill.HabitatSociety: The lair of these creatures is underwater, butthey always have a muddy above-water area for resting, sunningLhemselves, and eating. There are 5d4 muckdwellers in each lair.They keep shiny-things (gold, gems, etc.) in hoards in theirabove ground lairs. If 16 or more monsters are encountered inthis lair, they have double the given type Q treasure,Muckdwellers are an intelligent species, but: they have very lit¬tle culture. They have a very primitive nature worship that em¬phasizes the supremacy of water over land. They like shinythings because they gleam like the sea. Due to the weakness oftheir hands, they do not use or produce tools and use their backpaws for burrowing and their teeth for cutting. They occasional¬ly build tiny rafts of cut reeds and mud to float on the surface ofthe water, and propel themselves quickly with their hind legs(movement 18). They infrequently build crude shelters of reeds,twigs, and mud. These shelters are designed to protect them frompredators, not to shelter them, as weather doesn't bother themvery much.Because of the size difference between muckdwellers and lizardmen, muckdwellers consider lizard men to be a superior speciesand occasionally serve them. Muckdwellers believe in the "sur¬vival of the fittest" and have no room for love, mercy, or compas¬sion. Scoring the deathbite on a much larger creature gives theindividual elite status in the community, while being killed by abigger creature is a mark of shame, for it demonstrates poorhunting ability.Ecology: Omnivorous muckdwellers will eal plants, insects,and aquatic animals, but fresh, warm-blooded meat is their pre¬ferred diet.Muckdwellers are amphibians that spend their larval stage inthe water but their adult stage on land, Their average life span is9 to 12 years. It takes three years to grow to full-size. Muck¬dwellers in temperate climates hibernate during the wintermonths. Their natural enemies are snakes and certain giant car¬nivorous fishes. A muckdweller community has a hunting rangeof about two miles' radius.
Mudmen are formed in pools of mud where enchanted rivers(even mildly enchanted ones, such as a stream eroding a magicalstructure) collect and evaporate and concentrate the dweomer.Because they are creatures of magic, mudmen are sometimescalled dtoeomerlings* Mudmen are unintelligent life forces withbut one goal—to protect their pools against intruders.When aroused into a physical form, mudmen take on the ap¬pearance of animated mud in a stocky humanoid shape, about 4feet tall Their coloration varies between a dirty brown and tarblack. They have four thick fingers on each hand. Their legs staysubmerged within the pool, and are not usually visible. Theireyes are pools of jet black shadow.Mudmen speak no languages and are incapable of communi¬cating with any living creature.Combat: In their dormant state, mudmen wait beneath the sur¬face of the pool spread on Lhe bottom, feeding on the dweomerIn this state they are immune to all weapons, even magical ones.Spells that normally harm a mudmen will still affect it, althoughdamage is divided evenly among all the mudmen in the pool (theentire group counts as one creature for these effects, and frac¬tions are rounded down). When a creature enters the pool themudmen immediately sense its presence and take but a singleround to draw their substance together and rise to the surface,ready to attack on the following round. Once fully formed andstanding, a mudmen can be harmed by magical weapons.Mudmen attack by hurling mud at their opponents, who axeconsidered AC 10 (modified by Dexterity) for the purpose of de¬termining hits. Mud hardens on impact and slows the creature'smovement rate by 1 if it hits. While hurling mud, a mudman willalso advance on its victim at its full movement rate. Once within10 feet, it will hurl itself (literally) at the victim. A sucessful hitmeans the death of the mudman. but slows the victim's move¬ment by 4. A miss means the mudman must spend the next roundre-forming in order to attack again.Once a victim’s movement is brought to 0, he becomes immo¬bilized and suffocates, suffering 1-8 points of damage per rounduntil the mouth or nose is clear. The victim will die of suffocationin five consecutive rounds unless rescued. Hardened mud can becleared from a character's nose and mouth in one round. Move¬ment can be restored at a rate of 1 per five rounds.If the creature flees the pool, the mudmen will not pursue, astheir senses do not extend beyond the pool. Instead, they sinkinto the depths, return to their dormant state, and wait until thenext time someone enters the poolMudmen are affected by all spells that cause damage to livingcreatures (e.g., cause light wounds, magic missile , fireball flamestrike ), Dispel magic and dig act as fireballs cast at the same levelas the mage.Transmute mud to rock kills al] mudmen within its area of ef¬fect, with no saving throw allowed.Mudmen are immune to all poisons, natural and magical, andare unaffected by spells that affect the mind (e.g., hold r charm rand sleep).Habitat,'Society: Mudmen have two states: rest and activity,the latter of which solely involves killing intruders. A mudman spool varies in size between 20 and 200 feet in diameter. Suchpools are often found near waterfalls.Ecology: Mudmen are not natural creatures and not part of theecosystem. They try to kill all natural creatures that encounterthem and have no natural enemies. Over a long period of timethey absorb flesh, wood, and bone, extracting whateverdweomer they can get from it. so they rarely possess anytreasure—only if they were attacked within the last month bysomeone who was bearing treasure. Though no uses have beenrecorded for a mudman s mud, it is logical that mages would notignore its magical properties.
Mummies are corpses native to dry desert areas, where the deadare entombed by a process known as mummification, When theirtombs are disturbed, the corpses become animated into a weirdunlife state, whose unholy hatred of life causes them to attackliving things without mercy,Mummies are usually (but not always) clothed in rotting stripsof Jinen. They stand between 5 and 7 feet tall and are supematu-rally strong.Combat; Mummies are horrific enemies, A single blow fromones arm inflicts 1T2 points of damage, and worse, its scabroustouch infects the victim with a rotting disease which is fatal in 1-6months. For each month the rot progresses, the victim perma¬nently loses 2 points of Charisma, The disease can be cured onlywith a cure disease spell, Cure wounds spells have no effect on aperson inflicted with mummy rot and his wounds heal at 10% ofthe norma] rate. A regenerate spell will restore damage but willnot otherwise affect the course of the disease.The mere sight of a mummy causes such terror in any creaturethat a saving throw versus spell must be made or the victim be¬comes paralyzed with fright for 1 to 4 rounds. Numbers will bol¬ster courage: for each six creatures present, the saving throw isimproved by +1. Humans save against mummies af an addition¬al + 2.Mummies can be harmed only by magical weapons, which in¬flict only half damage (all fractions round down). Sleep, charm,hold, and cold-based spells have no effect. Poison and paralysisdo not harm them. A resurrection spell will turn Lhe creature intoa normal human (a fighter at 7th level ability) with the memorieso! its former life: or will have no effect if the mummy is olderthan the maximum age the priest can resurrect. A ndsfr will alsorestore a mummy to human form but a remove curse will not.Mummies are vulnerable to fire, even nonmagical varieties. Ablow with a torch inflicts 1-3 points of damage. A flask of burn¬ing oil inflicts T8 points of damage on the first round it hits and2-16 on the second round. Magical fires are +1 damage/die. Vi¬als of holy water inflict 2-8 points of damage per direct hit.Any creature killed by a mummy rots immediately and cannotbe raised from death unless both a cure disease and a raise deadspell are cast within six rounds.Habitat/Society: Mummies are the product of an embalmingprocess used on wealthy and important personages. Most mum¬mies are corpses without magical properties, On occasion, per¬haps due to powerful evil magic or perhaps because theindividual was so greedy in life that he refuses to give up his trea¬sure, the spirit of the mummified person will not die. but tapsinto energy from the Positive Material plane and is transformedinto an undead horror Most mummies remain dormant untiltheir treasure is taken, but then they become aroused and killwithout mercy,A mummy lives in its ancient burial chamber, usually in theheart of a crypt or pyramid. The tomb is a complex series ofchambers filled with relics (mostly nonmagical]. These relics in¬clude models of the mummy's possessions, favorite items andtreasures, the bodies of dead pets, and foodstuffs to feed the spir¬it after death. Particularly evil people will have slaves or familymembers slain when they die so the slaves can be buried withthem. Because of their magical properties, mummies exist onboth Prime and Positive Material planes.Ecology: To create a mummy a corpse should be soaked in apreserving solution (typically carbonate of soda) for severalweeks and covered with spices and resins. Body organs, such asthe heart, brain, and liver, are typically removed and sealed injars. Sometimes gems are wrapped in the cloth (if the treasurelisting for the mummy indicates it possesses gems, a few may beplaced in the wrappings). Mummies are not part of the naturalecosystem and have no natural enemies.Mummy dust is a component for rotting and disease magicalitems.
Also known as Arthkfepofs Children . greater mummies are apowerful form of undead created when a high-level lawful evilpriest of certain religions is mummified and charged with theguarding of a burial place. It can survive for centuries as thesteadfast protector of its lair, killing all who would defile its holyresting place.Greater mummies look just like their more common cousinssave that they are almost always adorned with (un)holy symbolsand wear the vestments of their religious order They give off anodor that is said to be reminiscent of a spice cupboard because ofthe herbs used in the embalming process that created them.Greater mummies are keenly intelligent and are able to com¬municate |ust as they did in life. Further, they have an inherentability to telepathically command all normal mummies createdby them. They have the ability to control other mummies, pro¬vided that they are not under the domination of another mum¬my, but this is possible only when verbal orders can be given.Combat: Greater mummies radiate an aura of fear that causes allcreatures who see them to make a fear check. A modifier is ap¬plied to this fear check based on the age of the monster, as indi¬cated on the Age & Abilities table at the end of this section. Theeffects of failure on those who miss their checks are doubled be¬cause of the enormous power and presence of this creature. Themummy's aura can be defeated by a remove fear, cloak of brav¬ery, or similar spell.In combat, greater mummies have the option of attacking withtheir own physical powers or with the great magic granted tothem by the gods they served in life. In the former case, they maystrike but once per round, inflicting 3d6 points of damage perattack.Anyone struck by the mummy's attack suffers the requireddamage and becomes infected with a horrible rotting disease thatis even more sinister than that of normal mummies for it mani¬fests itself in a matter of days, not months. The older the mum¬my, the faster this disease manifests itself (see the Age & Abilitytable aL the end of this entry for exact details). The disease causesthe person to die within a short time unless proper medical carecan be obtained. Twenty four hours after the infecting blowlands, the character loses 1 point from his Strength and Constitu¬tion due to the effects of the virus on his body. Further they lose2 points of Charisma as their skin begins to flake and whither likeold parchment. No normal healing is possible while the diseaseis spreading through the body, and the shaking and convulsionsthat accompany it make spell casting or memorization impos¬sible for the character. Only one form of magical healing has anyeffect—a regenerate spell will cure the disease and restore lost hitpoints, but not ability scores. All others healing spells are wast¬ed, A series of cure disease spells (one for each day that haspassed since the rotting was contracted) will temporarily halt theinfection until a complete cure can be affected. Regaining lostability score points is not possible through any means short of aioish<The body of a person who dies from mummy rot begins tocrumble into dust as soon as death occurs. The only way to resur¬rect a character who dies in this way is to cast both a cure diseaseand a raise dead spell on the body within 6 turns Cl hour) ofdeath. If this is not done r the body (and the spirit within it) arelost forever,Greater mummies can be turned by those who have the cour¬age and conviction to attempt this feat: however, the older themummy, the harder it is to overcome in this fashion. Once again,the details are provided on the Age & Abilities Table, They areimmune to damage from holy water, but contact with a holysymbol from a non-evil faith inflicts Ld6 points of damage onthem. Contact with a holy symbol of their own faith actually re¬stores Td6 hit points.Perhaps the most horrible aspect of these creatures, however,is their spell casting ability. All greater mummies were priests intheir past lives and now retain the spell casting abilities they hadthen. They will cast spells as if they were of 16th through 20thlevel (see below) and will have the same spheres available tothem that they did in life. Greater mummies receive the same bo¬nus spells for high Wisdom scores that player characters do.Dungeon Masters are advised to select spells for each greatermummy in an adventure before the adventure starts, For thoseusing Legends 6 Lore in their games, greater mummies are mostoften priests of Osiris. Set, and Nephythys. For those using TheComplete Priests Handbook, they are usually associated with
the worship of duces tors, darkness, death, disease, evil, guardi¬anship, and revenge. (If neither of these works is being used inthe campaign, simply assign the mummy powers as if it were astandard high-level deric.)Greater mummies can be harmed only by magical weapons,with older ones being harder to hit than younger ones. Even if aweapon can affect them, however, it wilt inflict only half damagebecause of the magical nature of the creature s body.Spells are also less effective against greater mummies than t heyare against other creatures. Those that rely on cold to inflictdamage are useless against the mummy, while those that dependon fire inflict normal damage. Unlike normal mummies, thesefoul creatures are immune to non-magical fire. The enchantingprocess that creates them, however leaves them vulnerable to at¬tacks involving electricity; all spells of that nature inflict halfagain their normal damage. In addition, older mummies developa magic resistance that makes even those spells unreliable.Greater mummies, like vampires, become more powerful withthe passing of time in Ravenloft. The following table lists the ap¬plicable changes to the listed statistics (which are for a newly ere-ated monster) brought on by the passing of time:To Hit indicates the magical plus that must be associated with aweapon before it will inflict damage to the mummy,HD are the number oi hit dice that the mummy has. Greatermummies are turned as if they had one more Hit Die than theyactually do. so a 250 year old (10 + 3) is turned as if it had 11 HitDice. Any mummy 500 years old or older is turned as a "special"undead.THAC0 as listed for the various Hit Dice levels of the mummyto allow for easy reference during play*Alignment As the mummy growrs older, it becomes darker andmore evil. In cases where two alignments are listed, there is a75% chance that the mummy will be of the first alignment and a25% chance thaL it will be of the second. Thus, a 300 year oldmummy is 75% likely to be chaotic evil.Wisdom is the creature's Wisdom score. When employing theirspells, greater mummies receive all of the bonus spells normallyassociated with a high Wisdom. Further, as they pass into thehigher ratings (19 and beyond) they gain an immunity to certainmagical spells as listed in the Player s Handbook.Magic is the creature's natural magic resistance. As can be seenfrom the table, old mummies can be very deadly indeed.Disease is the length of time it takes for a person infected withthe mummy's rotting disease to die.Level! indicates the creature's level as a priest. Older mummieshave access to far greater magics than younger ones and are thusmore dangerous than younger ones.XP lists the number of experience points awarded to a party forbattling and defeating a greater mummy of a given age.Mummies indicates the number of normal mummies that thecreature will have serving it when encountered.Fear indicates the penalty to those making fear checks due tothe evil influence of the greater mummy's foul aura,Habitat/Sodety: Greater mummies are powerful undead crea¬tures that are usually created from the mummified remains ofpowerful, evil priests. This being the case, the greater mummynow draws its mystical abilities from evil powers and darkness.In rare cases, however, the mummified priests served non-evilgod in Ide and are still granted the powers they had in life fromthose gods,Greater mummies often dwell in large temple complexes ortombs where they guard the bodies of the dead from the distur¬bances of grave robbers. Unlike normal mummies, however,they have been known to leave their tombs and strike out into theworld—bringing a dreadful shroud of evil down upon every landthey touch.When a greater mummy wishes to create normal mummies asservants, it does so by mummifying persons infected with its rot-ting disease. This magical process requires 12-18 hours (10 +2d4)and cannot be disturbed without ruining the enchantment. Per¬sons to be mummified are normally held or charmed so that theycannot resist the mummification process, Once the process iscompleted, victims are helpless to escape the bandages that bindthem. If nothing happens to free them, they will die of the mum¬my rot just as they would have elsewhere. Upon their death,however, a strange transformation takes place. Rather thancrumbling away into dust, these poor souls rise again as normalmummies. Obviously, this process is too time consuming to beused in actual combat, but the greater mummy will often attack apotential target in hopes of capturing and transforming it into amummy. All mummies created by a greater mummy are under itstelepathic command.Ecology: The first of these creatures is known to have been pro¬duced by Anhktepot. the Lord of Harakir, in the years before hebecame undead himself, It is believed that most, if not all, of thegreater mummies he created in his life were either destroyed ordrawn into Raven loft with him when he was granted a domain*A number of these creatures are believed to serve Anhktepot inhis domain, acting as his agents in other lands he wishes to learnwhat is transpiring in other portions of Ravenlof t.The process by which a greater mummy is created remains amystery to all but Anhktepot, It is rumored that this process in¬volves a great sacrifice to gain the favor of the gods and an oathof eternal loyalty to the Lord of Har'akir. If the latter is true, thenit may lend credence to the claim of many sages that Anhktepotcan command every greater mummy in existence to do his bid¬ding. It this is indeed the case, it makes the power of this darkfiend far greater than is generally supposed.
Myconids, or fungus men, are a race of intelligent fungi that livein the remote reaches of the Underdark. They are cautious crea¬tures that deplore violence; myconids have no desire to conqueranybody and would prefer to be left alone,Myconids resemble walking toadstools in human form. TheirFlesh is bloated and spongy and varies in color from purple togray. Their wide feet have vestigial toes and their pudgy handshave two stubby fingers and a thumb on either side. Myconids'Hit Dice determine their social status and abilities* They have nospoken language.Combat: Fungus men fight by dubbing with their claspedhands, causing ld4 points of damage per Hit Die. Thus a 1-HitDie myconid inflicts ld4 points of damage, a 2-Hit Die myconidcauses 2d4 points of damage, etc*, up to the 6-Hit Dice king thatinflicts 6d4 points of damage on a hit.Myconids also have the ability to spew forth clouds of specialspores. The number and kind of spores increase as they grow. Aseach myconid advances to another size leveL it gains the abilityto spray another type of spores, and the number of times per daythat each spore type can be emitted also increases* A myconidcan emit each of its spore types a number of times per day equalto its Hit Dice. For example, a 3-HD myconid (6 feet tall) canspray three types of spores, and it may use each type three timesper day. These spore types include the following:Distress ? This spore type is used to alert other myconids todanger or a need for aid. The cloud expands at a rate of 40 feetper round, expanding to its maximum of 120 feet in three rounds.This ability ls gained at the 1-Hit Die level.Reproducer: These spores are only emitted at the proper timefor growing new myconids so the population can be rigidly con¬trolled. They are also automatically ejected by a dying myconid.This ability is gained at the 2-Hit Dice level.Rapport: These spores are primarily used in the melding proc¬ess. However, they can be used by the myconids to communicatewith other species, since the fungus men do not talk, A smallcloud of spores is aimed at one person; if the person fails a savingthrow vs, poison (it can choose to fail), it can go into telepathicrapport, speaking mind-to-mind with the myconid as if it werenormal speech* The range of this effect is 40 feet. The duration isa number of turns equal to the Hit Dice of the myconid, Thisability is gained at the 3-Hit Dice level.Pacifier: This type of spore cloud may be spewed at a singlecreature. If the creature fails its saving throw vs. poison, it be¬comes totally passive, unable to do anything. The affected crea¬ture only observes; it is unable to perform any action even ifattacked. The range of this effect is 40 feet. The duration of thiseffect is a number of rounds equal to the Hit Dice of the myconid*This ability is gained at the 4-Hit Dice level.Ha//urinfiton This type of spore is usually used in the meldmgritual, but a myconid can project them at an attacker. The sporecloud may be shot at one creature, and if that creature fails itssaving throw vs* poison, it suffers violent hallucinations for anumber of turns equal to the Hit Dice of the myconid* Halluci¬nating creatures react as follows (roll ld20):The range of this effect is 40 feet. This ability is gained at the 5-Hit Dice level.Animator: This ability is gained at the 6-Hit Dice level, thelevel only the king may achieve. The king uses these spores toinfect a dead animal or creature. A purple fungus quickly coversthe corpse, taking over the dead body systems and putting it towork, animating the corpse to resemble a zombie (AC 10, Move9, HD 1, hp 4, 0AT 2 r Dmg bony claws for 1-3/1-3L It is notundead and cannot be turned by priests. It always strikes last in around* The body continues to rot and the fungus gradually re¬places the missing parts, becoming specialized to take over their
Functions. Eventually, however, the decay proceeds too far. andthe body stops functioning, able to rest at last. Animation takesplace Id4 days after infection, and the corpse is animated forld4+l weeks before it decays, Animated creatures will followsimple orders given by the animator (with rapport spores) to thebest of thetr ability Orders take priority over self-preservation.A myconid has a deathly fear of sunlight and will not willinglytravel to the surface world. The exact effects of sunlight on a my¬conid are unknown, but they must be highly detrimental for thefungus men to fear sunlight as they do.Habitat Society: Myconid society is based on "circles," ex¬tremely tight social groups that are linked by group work andmelding sessions, Myconid circles usually consist of 20 members:four ot each size from 1-5 Hit Dice ri.e., four I-HD, four 2-HD,etc.). Each community consists of ldlO circles,Each circles day is rigidly structured: eight hours of rest, fol¬lowed by eight hours of farming the fungus crops, followed byeight hours of melding. For the myconids, melding is entertain¬ment, worship, and social interaction combined. Hie fungus mengather in a tight circle and the elder myconid release rapport andhallucinatory spores. The entire group then merges into a collec¬tive telepathic hallucination for eight hours, Myconids considerthis melding to- be the reason for their existence. Only distressspores will bring a circle out of its mdd before the eight hourshave elapsed.The myconid king is always the largest member of the colonyand is the only member at the 6-Hit Dice level. It is also the onlymyconid that is not the member of a circle, The other myconidsregard separation from the circles with horror and pity the lonelyking. The leadership role is thought of as an unpleasant duty al¬most a condemnation. However, when the old king dies, thestrongest 3-Hit Dice myconid always assumes the role of the newking. The king must remain outside of circles to retain objectivityand to pay close attention to the duties of leadership. The kinganimates guardians for the colony so the myconids need notcommit violence. It coordinates the work schedule and pays at¬tention to affairs outside the colony that could affect the fungusmen. The king also practices fungal alchemy brewing special po¬tions that may be useful in times of trouble.In general, myconids are a peaceful race, desiring only to workand meld in peace. There are no recorded instances of disharmo¬ny or any sort of violence or disagreement between myconids. Ifforced into combat, they avoid killing if at all possible: violenceadversely affects their melding,Accord has never been reached between fungoid and human¬oid. Each views the other as a disgusting threat; humanoids seemyconids as ugly monsters, Myconids view humanoids as a vio¬lent, insane species out to conquer anything in their path, destroyanything they can t conquer, then go back down the path tomake sure there isn't anything they forgot to destroy or conquer.Myconids find it difficult to believe that humanoids are not goingto immediately use violence against them, and so they are veryreluctant to deal with them. Given population pressures in theunderworld in which the myconids live, further conflicts seeminevitable. If the myconids are approached in peace, it is possiblethat they will communicate, though they will be suspicious.Myconids live in Underdark regions, which are large cavern¬ous underground areas that range in size form a large caverncomplex to an entire secret continent beneath the ground. My¬conids try Lo find isolated spots away from civilized areas. Thesecommunities will usually be near water, for they like dampness.Work details sometimes patrol the Underdark. looking for signsof battles and unburied dead, which they bring to the king toanimate; these are the only myconids that will be found outsideof their lair. A myconid community is arranged around moundsof moss-covered stones, on which the circle members sit whenthey meld, and on which they sleep. There will also be a largegarden area; the myconids feed on water and small Fungi, and theking uses the garden ingredients to make his potions. Dead my¬conid kings are buried with honor beneath the mounds, whiledead myconids are buried near the gardens.Ecology: Myconids are an unusual species of fungi. They' growfungi, which later decay, and the myconids feed from these soilnutrients.A myconid has a life span of 24 years. It requires four years togrow to each Hit Die, thus a 1-Hit Die myconid is four years old,a 2-Hit Die myconid is eight years old, etc., to a maximum of 5Hit Dice at 20 years of age. It requires a special regimen for amyconid to reach 6 Hit Dice (king).A myconid king has the ability to brew magical potions fromfungi. In addition to standard magical potions, a myconid kingcan brew the following:Potion of Fungus Growth: This is used in times of populat ionshortage, when myconid circles need their young members togrow quickly. This potion increases a myconid s Hit Dice by 1, Itcan only be used on a myconid once in its lifetime: repeated doseshave no effect.Potion of Fungus Healing This potion only works on fungi. Itheals ld6 +1 lost hit points.Potion of Decay: This poison affects a humanoid creature as ifit were a dead creature infected with purple fungi spores. Thevictim must roll a successful saving throw vs. poison or die, re¬placed within ld4 +1 days by a fungal intelligence friendly to themyconids, which lasts for ld4 +1 weeks before permanently de¬caying. A cure disease spell will prevent the victim's death if castwithin three minutes of the infection. The combination of a curedisease spell and a raise dead spell will bring back victims of thefungus disease after 43 hours. This potion is rarely used by thefungus men.Powders of Hallucination: This is used when hallucinatoryspores are in short supply due to the death oi 4- and 5-Hit Diemembers of the circles. It is also used as a defensive measurewhen myconids are certain they are going to be attacked; a pow¬der is bundled and placed on a spider-silk film inside the entranceto their circle. Creatures of size M will break the powder free,affecting all creatures in a 20-foot radius as hallucinatory spores.Potion of Anointment: This is the special regimen that enablesa 5-Hit Die fungus to grow to 6 Hit Dice and become king.Growth is immediate and painful. It affects a myconid only once.It is poisonous to humans {successful saving throw vs, poison ordie).There is always one potion of anointment in the community. Ifother potions are Indicated, consult the following table:01-10 Another potion of anointment11 -20 Fo Non of fungi grow t hAlchemists have found a number of uses for myconid spores,typically in poisons and potions of delusion. Other than their po¬tions, myconids produce little of value to humanoid creatures.Possessing high intelligence and magical abilities* naga are snake-like creatures with human heads. They prefer warmer climatesand tend not to wander far from their lairs.The cold-blooded naga have glittering scales and grow to anadult length of 10 to 20 feet. Their fidless eyes are bright andwide, almost luminescent, and their spines are armored withsharp triangular extensions that grow in a line from the napes oftheir necks to the tips of their tails. Wise and patient, these crea¬tures can stay still for hours but move swiftly when alarmed.They favor resting in a semi-aware state that conserves their en¬ergy and makes them very hard to surprise. Occasionally, nagafashion a pouch to carry items under their chins. Both land typeshave a distinctive smell that pervades their lair and nearby areas.Combat: Naga often set traps to snare trespassers. Magicalspells are always attempted first, since naga have few meleeskills* Once their magic is expended, naga rely on their poisonousbites—only the largest of these creatures can actually constrictvictims like a giant snake,Habitat Society: Naga live solitary lives* hunting or foragingover an area usually only a quarter mile square. They favordwelling in a deep hole* but sometimes are found curled up inruins or in a darkened room. While the sexes are impossible totell apart, there is a 10% chance that an encounter includes oneor more mates. These matings are temporary, as a pregnant nagaquickly leaves the male to hide her eggs in a secluded spot. Youngnaga resemble giant snakes until they reach adulthood; then theirhuman-like head emerges after a long and painful molting.Ecology: While naga do not produce trade goods, their livesspan many human generations and they keep a detailed oral his¬tory, so they are good sources of information. They are oftenprotectors of treasures or artifacts for centuries. Their hides canbe fashioned into scale mail + 2, and their eyes and teeth havebeen sold for use in arcane spells.Surrounded with a flowery sweet scent, the guardian naga ismarked by green-gold scales* silvery spines, and flashing goldeneyes. It is so called because its lawful good nature makes it a per¬fect sentinel over a Uke-ahgned being's treasure or some evil. Thisnaga always warns off trespassers, and often buries those defeat¬ed in battle. The guardian naga can spit poison at an individualattacker at up to 30-foot range, and the poison kills all who failtheir saving throws vs. poison. In addition to a poisonous biteand constriction, these naga have the ability to use priest spells as6thdevel priests*These black-and-crimson-bandcd naga have a most human-likehead, with stringy hair and deep brown eyes, and they smell ofrotting flesh, which happens to be their preferred food! Hiding indeserted ruins or caverns, these evil and cunning spirit naga seek tocause harm to any creature Lhat passes through their domains.They set traps and frequently attack without warning. While theyare not big enough to constrict their prey they have a poisonousbite, a gaze that charms (as a charm spell) all those who look intotheir eyes and fail a saving throw vs, paralyzation* and can usewizard spells at 5th-level ability and priest spells at 4tlvlevel abili¬ty.The beautiful water naga are emerald green to turquoise in redoulated patterns with chocolate brown and pale jade green or darkgrey and olive, and their spines have red spikes that raise likehackles when they are angry. Their eyes are pale green to amber.These naga are found in clear, fresh water, Curious but neutral inattitude* water naga seldom attack unless threatened. In additionto their poisonous bite that inflicts ld4 points of damage, thesenaga have 5th-!evel wizard spelt abilities. They never know spellsthat deal with fire.Trios, pairs, alone or work withother lawful evil creaturesDark nagas are fey creatures who have human-like faces (withfanged mouths* on leathery, snake-like bodies* They usuallywork with other evil beings for mutual gain or survival. Darknagas tend to be black, purplish-black, or very dark blue in hue,and their crested heads and smooth, almost invisible scales makethem look like gigantic eels more than snakes.Combat: Dark nagas have natural ESP powers {00' rangeL anduse this ability constantly.Dark nagas have a {non-poisonous) bite and a poisonous tail¬sting; the barbed stinger does physical damage, and any struck beingmust save vs. poison or take 1-2 bp additional damage and fall into adrugged sleep (onset time 1 round, sleep lasts 2d4 rounds).The most feared ability of dark nagas is their power to wieldmagic. A dark naga casts spells as a 6th-level wizard (4,2,2), andemploys only verbal spells. It may learn these spells from drag¬ons. Phaerimm, or other creatures who can cast spells with but aword or thought (aci-of-will spells, as opposed to spell-like natu¬ral powers* can easily be altered into verbal-release magics . ,but the devising of a verbal-only version of a spell that normallyhas somatic and material components is not nearly so simple amatter)* It may devise new spells, or verbal^only spell versions,itself by means of experimentation, Either means of acquiringnew magics is slow and expensive, and this can often force darknagas into servitude to a stronger evil creature or anyone whohires them, or into the life of an adventurer.Dark nagas are immune to the effects of all known (normaland magical 1 acids, venoms, and poisons. Some have beenknown to swallow poisons and act as a courier, spitting up thedangerous liquid when they deliver it to its destination. They canspit poison that they are so carrying up to 10’ distant at any op¬ponent; this requires a successful attack roll, and takes the placeof their bite, though a naga can elect to bite and then release thepoison as it does so. combining the damage.In battle, a dark naga may use its sting and either a spell or abite in the same round, If space permits, the naga can direct itssting and bite against the same foe. but it is quite intelligentenough to direct attacks at multiple opponents, even attackingfoes in front of and behind it, simultaneously, if caught betweenthem in a narrow passage.Dark nagas cannot be mind-read; their ESP ability somehowrenders them immune to the ESP-like probes of others. They aresubject but resistant to charm, sleep* hold and similarenchantment/charm spells, receiving a +2 bonus to all savingthrows against this school of magic*Habitat Society: Dark nagas lair in rocky places, such as cavernsor ruins; they like to have a home where they can hide things(such as treasures and spellbooks), that has more than one entryor exit, and at least one place narrow enough that they can blockit with their body, and singlehandedly fight off intruders, Darknagas are fond of traps, and will devise these (or hire other crea¬tures to Install them) whenever possible.Dark nagas tend to be loners, but can form stable familygroups of two or three; they are bisexual, and give birth to asquirming mass of isi^ny wormlike young which they promptlyabandon to fend for themselves. Intelligent enough to know theycan prevail against few creatures in the Realms alone, dark nagaswork with other evil creatures, such as ores, hobgoblins, drow,phaerimm, beholders, and the like. They like to fill a "com¬mander and magical strike force” role, perhaps in a sergeant-likeintermediary rank, under a more powerful ruler—but they arewise enough to adopt the faith, beliefs, and rules of whatevergroup they join,Ecology: Dark nagas do not willingly eat other dark nagas, butthey will eat just about anything else, both alive and dead. Theyeat a few lichens and the occasional green plant , but their maindiet is meat. They especially prize hot, still-fresh blood.Dark nagas spend their lives outwardly working with, or serv¬ing, others. Whenever possible, however, they also pursue pri¬vate goals, which may be as whimsical and odd as some humangoals ("cover this desert valley with trees" for instance), but al¬ways include increasing their personal power by acquiring newspells and magical items. Dark nagas are quick to plunder fallenfoe, swallowing items, scrolls, and spellbooks to spiL forthlater—for all dark nagas have a bag-like internal organ that theycan use to carry things. This organ has thick, rubbery air-sacwalls to protect the naga against sharp points and the like, but italso protects the cargo against digestive juices, and has the unu¬sual side-effect of shielding magic from all detection spells.
The neogi appear as a cross between a wolf spider and a morayeel The short, furry, eight-limbed body is topped by a lithe,bare, fleshy neck with a serpentine head, its mouth filled withneedle-sharp teeth. The ends of its limbs are tipped with smallclaws. The fur of the neogi is a light tan, but dyed a variety ofcolors to signify power, rank, accomplishments, and warnings toother neogi, The older a neogi grows, the more colorful its hidebecomes.The neogi are ruthless slayers and plunderers, and think noth¬ing of eating their enemies, servants, or fallen comrades. Theyare a hateful, xenophobic race*Neogi can communicate in their own language and in Com¬mon, Many speak 1-4 other languages to help facilitate theirslaves taking orders correctly.Combat: The neogi have a number of defenses, the first, andmost obvious being their enslavement of umber hulks (see entry).Each neogi has a personal umber hulk slave who is a combinationbodyguard, manservant, and useful set of hands* Second, thebite of the neogi is poisonous. Those bitten and failing a savingthrow vs, poison are affected as by a slow spell for IdS rounds.Multiple bites will extend this period by an additional ld8 roundsper bite. Lastly 1 in 10 neogi has some magical ability equal tohuman spell use of levels 1-8.Habitat'Society: The hated neogi are only found in very remotelocations, deep beneath the earth, or among the farthest stars.Their lives revolve around their communities and their slaves.Neogi area slaving race with an inborn sense of property: all iseither owned or owner, slave or neogi. Even neogi are slaves toother neogi, but slave-neogi may have their own slaves. Theneogi tattoo their norvneogi slaves with symbols of ownership,usually on the left shoulder in the front and back.Captive umber hulks are trained from birth to follow their“small lords," caring for their every need. Any neogi can com¬mand another umber hulk (the effect of this command is akin tothe effect of the charm monster spell).The neogi world view of own or be owned" has resulted in aparanoid outlook that borders on xenophobia, and their relent¬less attacks on other races result in their being universally hated.The only "normal" race with ties to neogi are the mind flayers,who make a profit on the neogi slave trade.Ecology: As a neogi grows older and his mind fades, his ordersbecome confused and his slaves become disobedient. His fellowneogi may choose to poison the older one at once. The differentpoisons moving through its body overload the old neogi s sys¬tem, and it begins its change into a Great Old Master,The neogi making the transformation swells to 20 feet in heightand a similar girth. Its legs and arms become useless, and its intel¬ligence fades; it now lives only to eat, Uve flesh is preferred, butthe dead will sustain it* A Great Old Master inflicts ld!2 pointsof damage per round to any creature it is fed.After 2 months of eating, the skin of the Great Old Masterbursts and a new crop of mature neogi spill forth. These are un¬marked and barely sentient at birth, and for the next week thebrood area resounds with combat as the young neogi kill eachother for food. Of the 20-40 neogi that eat their way out, onlyabout 3-6 survive. These are considered slaves of the community,until such a time as they claim an umber hulk as their personalslave*If a Great Old Master is attacked and its flesh pierced, it re¬leases 2d4 neogi to defend itself. These are taken from the futurebrood, and are not replaced. Blunt weapons will not pierce theskin and therefore do not bring forth young. Edged or piercingweapons, or magical spells that pierce or bum, will produce thisdefensive reaction.These rogue neogi have rebelled and are seeking to escape theother neogi and their poisons that will transform Lhem into GreatOld Masters* Rogue neogi are little better than their fellows, andare. if anything, more desperate, due to being pursued by theirformer fellows, all eager to start the process of producing moreneogi.
Nightmares are the evil steeds of the lower planes, often servingas mounts for baatezu, tanar'ri, night hags, liches, and powerfulundead lords.They look like large, powerful horses with a jet black coat.Nightmares have glowing red eyes, flaming orange nostrils, andhooves that bum like embers. Their flowing manes and greattails are ragged and wild.Nightmares can understand commands from evil riders. Theycommunicate among themselves by empathyCombat: Nightmares are hateful of material life. They will oftenattack any non-lower planar creature they encounter (and willsometimes attack the lower planar creatures, too). They have vi¬cious fangs that inflict 2-8 points of damage on a successful bite.Their burning hooves each inflict 4-10 (ld6 + 4) points of damageper attack and will set any combustibles on fire.During combat, the excitement and fervor of the fight willcause nightmares to emit a smoking, hot cloud of noxious va¬pors, It blinds and chokes all those within 10 feet of the evil steed.Victims must make a saving throw vs, paralyzation or beat a “2penalty on their attack and damage dice.Although they have no wings, nightmares are able to magi¬cally propel themselves through the air at an impressive rate.They may fly through the Astral and Ethereal planes at will.Habitat Society: Nightmares are the servitor steeds of manylower planar creatures. They are intelligent, however, and can¬not be treated as casually as a simple horse. They will willinglyand gleefully serve as a mount for any mission involving evil.However, for the unwary rider, a nightmare's own ambitions canprove to be insurmountable. These hateful steeds will often dowhat they want rather than follow the wishes of their "master*" Inmany ways, nightmares pose the same problems as magicalweapons with large egos.Anyone on the lower planes who is not a native thereof canattract the attention of a nightmare to secure it as a mount. Theprocess involves several spells, as well as an offering for the crea¬ture's service. The summoning requires a mage or specialist wiz¬ard of at least 5th level. The following spells must all be cast bythe same spell-user. First, the mage must cast a mount spell. Thisconjuration is used to attract the attention of the nightmare.Next, a monster summoning III spell must be cast to bind thenightmare into service. When that is complete, a of fog spellis cast. If all of this is done properly the nightmare will comegalloping through the fog, nostrils flaring and eyes gleaming,ready to perform in the service of evil* Lastly, an offering is re¬quired, This may be given by anyone, not just the spell caster.The offering must be oat-like flakes made from platinum that thenightmare will eat. The flakes must be of at least 200 gp value.Whoever feeds the oats to the nightmare will be its master for 72hours,Creatures of the lower planes do not perform these steps tosummon a nightmare. It is unknown what dark agreement theymake for a nightmares service,Once per decade, on the plane of Hades, there is a dark andsinister time called Gloom Meet* At this time the various lowerplanar denizens will meet and decide how they will spread theirwill for the next decade. The nightmares play a special role indoom Meet , for they spread the word that the meeting is aboutto begin. As the Gfoorci Meet approaches, there is a higher con¬centration of nightmares and their frequency changes from veryrare to uncommon. This is the first indication that Gloo^n Meet isto occur, and lasts for approximately two weeks. Immediatelyprior to the meeting, the nightmares ride the planes in a terrifyingcharge that notifies all that the Gloom Meet has started.Ecology: Nightmares are the wild steeds of the planes. It is theirplace in the lower planes to act as mounts for missions of evil anddread. They have no biological link to true horses, A nightmareis merely a foul minion of evil, without need of food or air, thatthrough some unknown pact has taken the form of a huge, terri¬ble steed. Nightmares are listed as carnivores, based solely ontheir habit of eating fallen foes whenever possible* However,there is nothing to indicate that the nightmares derive any oftheir sustenance from the flesh of animals—they more likely gainall their strength through their service to evil.
So beautiful that a glimpse can blind or even kill a man, thenymphs are the embodiment of loveliness, a triumph of nature.A nymph s beauty is beyond words—an ever-young womanwith sleek figure and long, thick hair, radiant skin and perfectteeth, full lips and gentle eyes. A nymph s scent is delightful, andher long robe glows, hemmed with golden threads and embroi¬dered with rainbow hues of unearthly magnificence. A nymph'sdemeanor is graceful and charming, her mind quick and witty.Nymphs speak their own musical language and the commontongue.Combat: Neutral in their alliances and cares, nymphs do notfight, but flee if confronted by an intruder or danger. Nymphs areable to cast dimension door once per day and can employ druidi-cal priest spells at 7th ability level, giving a nymph four 1st, two2nd, two 3rd, and one 4th level spell once per day. Looking at anymph will cause permanent blindness unless the onlookers saveversus spell. If the nymph is nude or disrobes, an onlooker willdie unless a saving throw versus spell is successful.Habitat.Sodety: These beautiful females inhabit only the love¬liest of wilderness places, clear lakes and streams, glacier palaces,ocean grottoes, and crystalline caverns. Nymphs prefer a solitaryexistence, but very occasionally a few will gather together in aplace of spectacular charm, though these rendezvous seldom lastfor more than a few months. Animals of all types flock to anymph to be petted and caressed, forgetting their natural enemiesto gather around the lovely creature.There is a 10% chance that a nymph will be friendly if ap¬proached by a good creature without the latter first glimpsing thenymph, by calling or other prior notice. On the other hand, if anymph sees a human male with L8 Charisma and good alignmentbefore he sees her, it is 90% probable that the nymph will be fa¬vorably inclined toward the man. It is still necessary to makesaving throws upon sighting the nymph,Nymphs hate ugliness and evil and sometimes will help to de¬feat it. Any treasure they possess has usually been given to themby some lovesick man.Ecology: Like a druid, a nymph believes in the sanctity of na¬ture and her environment and will try to keep her lair safe andpure. She will heal wounded animals and mend broken trees andplants. Sometimes she will even help a human in distress (5%chance). Since nymphs live for many generations, they can pro¬vide a wealth of information on the history of an area and oftenknow secret places, hide-outs, and entrances long forgotten. If aman is kissed by a nymph, all painful and troubling memories areforgotten for the rest of the day—this may be a boon to some anda curse to others, A lock of nymph’s hair can be used to create apowerful sleeping potion or, if enchanted and woven into a clothand sewn into a garment, will magically add one point to thewearer s Charisma. The tears of a nymph can be used as an ingre¬dient in a philter of love . if a woman bathes in a nymph's pool,her Charisma is increased by two points until she bathes again.
The dreaded cuttlefish" are the scourge of ocean-going sailorsand fishermen. Malicious and cunning, giant octopi have beenknown to attack ships, sinking smaller craft and stealing crewmembers from the larger ships.Giant octopi change their color to blend into their surround¬ings, and the range of colors and patterns available to them isextensive, from green to deep black, blue speckles and redstripes. Tentacles are often disguised as seaweed. Once camou-Liaged, there is only a 10% chance to detect them, and usually itis their eyes that give them away. Normal coloration is grey tobrown, and their vicious beaks are a deep yellow with a brightorange mouth and tongue.Combat: An octopus will readily attack swimmers or small ves¬sels in order to eat the crew. Several have been known to cooper¬ate m order to overwhelm a larger ship, and any craft seized bythese monsters loses way and comes to a full stop in three turns.A giant octopus generally attacks with six of its eight tentacles,using two to anchor itself. Each striking tentacle causes ld4points of damage, but unless the member is loosened or severed,it constricts for 2d4 points of damage every round after striking.If a victim is dragged dose enough to the beak, the monster canbite for 2d6 points of damage.Any victim under 8 feet tall or long can be struck by only onetentade at a time, and the chance that both upper limbs arepinned on a successful strike is 25%, while the chance that bothupper limbs are free is also 25%, When both upper limbs areheld, the victim has no attack; if only one limb is held the victimattacks with a -3 penalty to its attack roll; if both limbs are Free{i.e. r the tentacle is wrapped around the victims body) then thevictim attacks with a -1 penalty to its attack roll, Tentades gripwith a Strength of 18/20, Any creature with a Strength equal toor greater than IS 20 can grasp the tentade and negate its con¬striction. This does not free the victim, and the octopus will im¬mediately seek to drag the victim to its mouth to eat it, To breakfree, a tentade must be severed; this requires 8 points of damage.(These hit points are in addition to those the octopus gains fromits S Hit Dice.)Once three or more tentades are severed, it is 90% probablethat the octopus will retreat, ejecting a cloud of black ink 40 feethigh by 60 feet wide by 60 feet long. This ink doud completelyobscures the vision of any creature within it. The wounded octo¬pus then camouflages itself in its lair or a nearby hiding place, Ittakes the monster two to three months to grow back severed ten¬tades,Habitat/Sodety; While octopi cooperate to attack a foodsource, they live a solitary existence, preferring to shelter inwarm water of medial to shallow depth. Lairs are made inwrecked ships and undersea caves; any treasure found there isjust an incidental leftover from previous meals. Consummatehunters, these monsters have great patience and cover a verysmall area, waiting for their food to come to them. Mating sea¬son comes every spring. Like most marine animals,.octopi leavetheir eggs in a reef to fend for themselves.Ecology: When prey is scarce, or if it has been wounded, anoctopus turns to scavenging, eating everything from small crus¬taceans to seaweeds. Survival is paramount with this monster. Itprefers to hunt at night, and often a man missing during the latenight watch has been grabbed by a giant octopus, pulled quicklyover the side, and eaten.Giant octopi s leathery hide is tough and waterproof, and it isworked into fine rain ponchos by sailors lucky enough to catchand kill one. Another byproduct of these monsters is their ink —they are most often hunted for this commodity. Giant octopusink can be used to pen magical scrolls.
Ogres are big, ugly, greedy humanoids that live by ambushes,raids, and theft. ill-tempered and nasty these monsters are oftenfound serving as mercenaries in the ranks of ore tribes, evil cler¬ics. or gnolls. They mingle freely with giants and trolls.Adult ogres stand 9 to 10 feet tall and weigh 300 to 350 pounds.Their skin colors range from a dead yellow to a dull black-brown, and {rarely) a sickly violet. Their warty bumps are oftenoi a different color—or at least darker than their hides. Theireyes are purple with white pupils. Teeth and talons are orange orblack. Ogres have long, greasy hair of blackish-blue to dull darkgreen. Their odor is repellent, reminiscent of curdled milk. Dress¬ing in poorly cured furs and animal hides, they care for theirweapons and armor only reasonably well. It is common for ogresto speak ore, troll, stone giant, and gnoll. as well as their ownguttural language, A typical ogre's life span is 90 years.Combats In small numbers, ogres fight as unorganized individ¬uals, but groups of 11 or more will have a leader, and groups of16 or more usually include two leaders and a chieftain. Ogreswielding weapons gel a Strength bonus of +2 to hit; leaders have+ 3, chieftains have +4. Females fight as males but score only 2-6points of damage and have a maximum of only 6 hit points perdie. Young ogres fight as goblins.Habitat Society: Ogre tribes are found anywhere, from deepcaverns to mountain tops, Tribes have 16-20 males, 2-12 females,and 2-fi young. Shamans, if present, will be of 3rd level, and haveaccess to the spheres of combat, divination, healing, protection,and sun (darkness only). Ogres live by raiding and scavengingand they will eat anything. Their fondness for eif, dwarf, andhaiding flesh means that there is only a 10% chance that thesewill be found as slaves or prisoners. There is a 30% chance thatan ogre lair will include 2-8 slaves. Captured prisoners are al¬ways kept as slaves (25%) or food (75%), Extremely avaricious,ogres squabble over treasure and cannot be trusted, even by theirown kind.mar Class 3. He inflicts 5-15 (2d6+3) points of damage per at¬tack, + 6 with weapon,if 16 or more ogres are encountered, they will be led by two pa¬trol leaders and a chieftain. The chieftain is a 7 Hit Dice monsterwith 34-37 hit points and Armor Class 4, He inflicts 8-16 (2d6 + 6)points of damage per attack, +6 with weapon. Chieftains areusually the biggest and smartest ogres in their tribes.When more than II ogres are encountered, a leader will bepresent. He is a 7 Hit Dice monster with 30-33 hit points and Ar-
Etiology: Ogres consistently plague mankind, lusting for gold,gems, and jewelry as well as human flesh. They are evil-naturedcreatures that join with other monsters to prey on the weak andfavor overwhelming odds to a fair fight. Ogres make no craftsnor laborThe oriental ogre has light blue, light green, or pale brown skinwith ivory horns. The hair is usually a different color (blue withgreen, green with blue) and is darker in shade; the main excep¬tion to this coloration js found in ogre magi with pale brown skinand yellow hair. They have black nails and dark eyes with whitepupils. The teeth and tusks are very white. Ogre magi are tallerand more intelligent than their cousins and they dress in orientalclothing and armor.Combat: Ogre magi can perform the following feats of magic:fly (for 12 turns), become invisible, cause darkness in a 10-footradius, po/ymorp/i to a human or similar bipedal creature (4 feetto 12 feet tall), and regenerate one hit point per round (lost mem¬bers must be reattached to regenerate). Once per day they can dothe following: charm person , sleep, assume gaseous form, andcreate a cone of cold 60 feet long with a terminal diameter of 20feet, which inflicts $-64 (8dS) points of damage (save vs. spell forhalf damage), Oriental ogres attack with magic first and resort tophysical attacks only if necessary. They are +1 on morale.In battle, ogre magi prefer the naganata (75%) or scimitar andwhip (25%). Those found in oriental settings might (25%) pos¬sess ki power or have mastered a martial arts form. As ogre magiare intelligent, they wiU not fight if faced with overwhelmingodds, but will flee to gather their forces or hide.Habitat Sodefy: These monsters live in fortified dwellings orcaves and foray to capture slaves, treasure, and food. Ogre magipriests of up to 7th level have been reported. Tribes are small,with 2-5 females and 1-3 children that will not fight, but ratherseek to escape in gaseous form . These monsters are extremelyprotective of their young and will battle with savage abandon tosave one's life. If a young ogre mage is captured, these creatureswill pay high ransom for its return, but they will seek revengeand will never forget the insult of the kidnaping.If encountered in their lair, ogre magi will be led by a chief ofgreat strength (+2 on each Hit Die, attacking and saving as a 9Hit Dice monster). Treasure is divided by this chief and his troveis always the richest The tribe will have their own dan symboltypical to the oriental lands, and this symbol will be stitched onits war banners and flags as well as on armor and headdresses.The chief will often have the tribes symbol tattooed on his fore¬head or back.Ogre magi speak the common tongue, their own special lan¬guage, and the speech of normal ogres.Ecology: Ogre magi magical armor is too large to fit a man. Thismonster's lair is usually a powerful structure that can be expandedinto a mighty fortress if it can be nd of its original owners,Faster and fiercer than their land kin, the freshwater merrow aregreenish and scaled with webbed hands and feet. Their necks arelong and thick, their shoulders are sloping, and they have hugemouths and undershot jaws. Merrow have black teeth and nailsand deep green eyes with white centers, and their hair resemblesslimy seaweed. About 10% grow ivory horns, especially themore powerful males.Aquatic ogres are very fond of tattoos, and females may havetheir entire bodies inked with scenes of death and destruction as asign of status. Merrow speak their own dialect and the languageof other ogres.Combat: Using their green coloration, aquatic ogres can hide,becoming effectively invisible 10-80% of the time, depending onterrain. They attack from cover, so others are -5 on their surpriseroll, Merrow typically attack with a large piercing spear (inflict¬ing 2-12 points of damage) in a swimming charge at +1 to hit,followed by melee with talons and teeth.Habitat'Society: A typical merrow tribe consists of:2 patrol leaders, AC3, 5 + 5 Hit Dice, +1 on damage2-24 standard merrow2-24 females, AC5, 3+3 Hit Dice, 1-2/1-2/1-6 damage1-12 young, AC6, 2 + 2 Hit Dice, 1-2/1-2/1-4 damage1 shaman of 3rd level abilityMerrow dwell in caves in shallow, fresh water (50-250 feet deep),often with scrags (see Troll). They can live out of water for abouttwo hours, so they often forage on land, Merrow usually controlan area with a radius of 10-25 miles, hunting and foragingthroughout this territory. In times of scarcity, or when the lure oftreasure becomes too great, a war party will attack the coastalvillages of man. Merrow prefer gold and jewels and often over¬look dull magical items in search of glittering prizes. The goals ofa merrow chieftain rule the tribe, and these power-hungry mon¬sters seek to completely control their ' kingdoms/' often leadingto attacks on intruding ships.Ecology; Merrow are ignorant and superstitious and have noskills but plundering and murder. Areas of the freshwater lakesand seas where they have influence are avoided by sailors andfishermen. These monsters are carnivores, preying on all who en¬ter their regions, often emptying the seas of life with their vora¬cious appetites.
When adventuring companies journey into the wilderness theyoften run into ogres: big, ugly humanoids. Occasionally an ogreparty will include one or two individuals that are a little shorter,but significantly smarter, wielding a weapon with more skill thanmight have been expected. They have a better understanding ottheir opponents, and they grunt commands that anticipate theadventurers' moves, In this way half-breeds, the issue of ogresand humans, earn the respect of their kind.Half-ogres range from 7 to 8 feet in height and weigh from 315to 425 pounds* Skin and hair color are variable, but tend towardbrown, gray black, dull yellow (skin only), or any of the abovewith a slight gray-green tint. Teeth and nails are always orange.Most half-ogres have human-like eyes, though about one in fivehave the white pupils common to ogres. Their odor is noticeable,but it is not as overpowering as that of a full-blooded ogre. Thehalf-ogre traditionally wears heavy skins and furs, bringing hisArmor Class up to that of his ogre brethren, but rare individualshave the ability to make a shirt of chain-mail, for an AC of 3.Half-ogres speak common (more clearly and unimpeded thanogres), ogrish. orcish, troll, and one other, usually human, lan¬guage* They live about 110 years.Half-ogres posses intravision out to 60 feet. Their sense ofsmell Is better than an ogre's, but it falls short of a human's.Combat: Half-ogres of any sort suffer “2 penalties to their at¬tack rolls against dwarves and “4 against gnomes, since thosesmaller races are so skilled at battling bigger folk.Half-ogres in combat are often tound with lull-blooded ogres*If so, the half-ogre will most likely be leading the ogre party. Theogres fight more wisely when led by a half-ogre that concentratesassaults on characters it recognizes as spelicasters, and teamingup against skilled lighters. Ambushes are bet ter-planned andmore carefully baited.To earn command privileges, particularly when ogre leadersare present, a half-ogre must show himself quick to battle andfierce in combat. Half-ogres’ usual weapon of choice is a hugesword (use the statistics for a two-handed bastard sword, savethat hall-ogres can employ it one-handed, with a large shield inthe other), or a war spear capable of causing 2d4 points of dam¬age. A half-ogre inflicts an additional 2 points of damage, due tohis mass.Half-ogres sometimes gather together to form their own tribes.In Lhis case, they will be encountered in bands of 2dl0 and willexpend as much energy choosing and preparing an ambush as onthe combat itself.For every five half-ogres in an encounter, there is an additionalveteran with 5+3 Hit Dice, For every 10 half-ogres, there is akader with 6 Hit Dice. If more than 15 half-ogres are encoun¬tered, they will have a shaman, a fighter/priest with 5 + 3 HitDice and the spells of a 4thTevel priest, and two acolyte sha¬mans, with 4+6 Hit Dice and the spells of a 2nd-level priest.Half-ogres are inclined to Intimidate others. A broad, fang-tilled smile and perhaps a slamming fist* often encourages anNPC to suddenly remember appointments, or perhaps faint deadaway. Kobolds will dutch their spears and cringe in unison when7'6" of solid muscle smashes their door to splinters and storms in;even larger monsters have serious reservations about attackinghall-ogres. They will also terrify local human populations intoleaving a half-ogre and his companions alone.Habitat'Society: Halt-ogres have no society of their own. If theylive with ogres, they are the quick-thinking members of the tribe,ever on their toes to prove themselves worthy* If a half-ogre isreared in a human community, he learns to live with suspicionand fear, and often turns to a military or solitary occupation.Occasionally, half-ogres join with half-ores, orogs, ogrillons,and other humanoids. These communities are small (5-200 resi¬dents! and usually isolated, but can appear in virtually any ter¬rain. Half-ogres fill a middle niche—more powerful thanhalf-ores or orogs, but smarter than ogrillons. trolls, and otherhumanoids. As a whole, these communities are chaotic evil, withneutral tendencies stemming from the level of cooperation neces¬sary in a "half-caste" situation. They prefer others of their ownkind, and are tolerant of ores and ogres. Enough of them havehuman blood that they regard humans with neutrality. Indeed,chaotic evil humans often find their most enthusiastic followersin such a hybrid tribe, They also tolerate monstrous humanoidssuch as trolls and giants, but ail other races art treated with un¬disguised hostility.Hybrid settlements raid civilized territories for prisoners andloot, A settlement may be found holding prisoners, It is alsolikely tor treasure to be found in a hybrid camp. Half-ogres areusually cheated out of most of Lheir rightful treasure shares bythe more cunning orogs and half-ores.Ecology; Sages have expressed much concern over the years,wondering why ogres can interbreed with humans but not withelves or halflmgs. When the actual answer was discovered, thesages' concerns proved unfounded. The explanation had nothingto do with any supposed common origin of humans and ogres,but rather in a unusual characteristic that ogres share with ores:rapidly adaptive biology. Just as ores and ogres can adapt quick¬ly to any terrain, from forests to the highest mountains, their ge¬netic construction allows them breed with any humanoid race.This ability to breed easily is frequently passed on to theirprogeny. Half-ogres can also breed successfully with most otherhumanoid races. If this process continues for many generations,the result is a horrible hybrid known as a mongrefmnn. Manymongreimen have strong strains of ore and ogre in their blood¬lines, which may account for their chaotic evil attitudes.The half-ogre shares the ogres place in the ecosystem: that of aplague upon demihumans and humans, lusting for treasure andmaking neither crafts nor good labor. The beginnings of half-ogre poetry have been around for many years, but it is exception¬ally ugly and disturbing,Half-ogres may be NPCs or even PCs, with DM r s consent. If so,they have statistics determined in the following fashion. Strengthis Id-6 +13, with a roll of 6 being treated as 18(00) strength. Char¬acters with a Strength roll of 5 (18 strength) should roll normallyfor extraordinary strength, Dexterity is 3d4. Constitution is Idb+ 13, with a roll of 6 being treated as an IS. Intelligence is 3d4.Wisdom is 2d6. Charisma is 2d4, doubled for effective Charismawith respect to ogres, half-ogres, ores, orogs, and other human¬oids. Half-ogres reared outside of the tribes do not gain the lan¬guages mentioned earlier. Player character half-ogres may not beexclusively priests, but may practice any other class allowed half-ogres. Starting Hit Dice are doubled at 1st level, progressing nor¬mally at 2nd level and above.As NPCs, shaman half-ogres are fighter /priests. Also possibleare half-ogres that function solely as priests, rising to 8th level,and rarely seen fighter/thieves (3+9 Hit Dice with the skills of1st* or 2nd-level thieves). Half-ogre thieves are always self-taught, and accept the following racial adjustments: Pick Pockets-20%, Open Locks +5%, Find ' Remove Traps +0%, Move Si*lently *5%, Hide in Shadows +5%, Detect Noise +0%, ClimbWalls -30%, Read Languages -25% .The ogrillon is a fiercer species of the half-ogre, being the fruit ofa union between ogres and ores. The ogrillon displays the generaltendencies of its larger cousin with some exceptions. It is evenmore brutish and violent, and it normally learns to speak onlyogrish and a handful of words in common.The ogrillon is the size of an ore, and closely resembles one.One in every ten is born with features and coloration very similarto those of ogres: purple eyes with white pupils, black teeth, yel¬lowish skin with dull, dark green hair. The skin of an ogrillon ofeither type is covered with small horn plates, giving it a superiorArmor Class and enabling it to fight without weapons. An ogribIon disdains armor and most other material items, retaining onlya handful of gold pieces as treasured belongings. It is uncertainwhy they would keep gold, except perhaps as good luck charms.They love mayhem. In combat they disdain weapons andplunge in with both fists. Due to their great strength and horn-re info reed fists, each punch delivers ld6 + 1 points of damage. Anogrillon out of combat is restless and troubled, but it will be seenchuckling merrily to itself during a good fight.Because of their single-mindedness, ogrillons are often ap¬proached by ores when they need good fighters against some ene¬my. Ogrillons are happy to join and fight, sometimes for the loveof combat and destruction, but often for more lucky gold pieces.In combat, there is only a 10% chance that a typical ogrillon canbe distinguished from an ore. Ogrillons that resemble ogres, ofcourse, dearly stand out,Ogrillons are the issue of a female ore mated with a male ogre.Thankfully, U is sterile. The union of a male ore and a femaleogre yields an orog, a better class of humanoid monster detailedin the "Ore" entry.
There are many different varieties of ooze, slime, and jelly. Moreare being discovered all ihe time, as warped wizards seek to cre¬ate life or fashion efficient dungeon scavengers. The unifying fea¬ture of these creatures is a dissolving touch that consumes flesh aswell as weapons and armor.Olive slime is a strain of monstrous plant life, closely related togreen slime, that grows while clinging to ceilings. More danger¬ous than green slime, olive slime favors moist, subterranean re¬gions. It feeds on whatever animal, vegetable, or metallicsubstances happen to cross its path. The vibrations of a creaturebeneath it are sufficient to cause it to release its tendrils and drop,Olive slime ignores armor for purposes of determining hit proba¬bility. It also negates Dexterity bonuses unless its target is awareof the presence of the slime and takes steps to avoid the stuff.Contact with olive slime causes a numbing poison to ooze fromthe creature. The slime then spreads itself over the body of itsvictim, sending out parasitic tendrils to feed upon the body fluidsof the host. For humans and demihumans, the point of attach¬ment is usually along the spinal area. The feeding process soonbegins to affect the brain of the host as it changes the host's body.An unobservant victim must roil a saving throw vs. poison, fail¬ure indicating that the victim has not noticed that the olive slimehas dropped upon him. Any group of characters in the vicinitywill have a 50% chance of noticing the slime s attachment with acasual glance, This percentage may be adjusted only by magicalitems. A thorough search by wary individuals reveals the oliveslime without difficulty.Within 2d4 hours, the hosts main concern becomes how T tofeed, protect, and sustain the growth of the olive slime. Natu¬rally. this includes keeping the slime's presence a secret from anycompanions. If an affected character's companions become suspi¬cious, or if they demonstrate any desire to destroy olive slime,the affected character will escape at the first opportunity. Thehost's food intake must double or the character wastes away(10% of the character s hit points per day rounding up, and nonatural healing can take place while a character is wasting away.After ld6 + 6 days, the host suddenly and painfully metamor¬phoses into a vegetable creature. The olive slime gradually re¬places skin and muscle tissue, and it forms a symbiotic brain link.The new creature has no interest in its former form or fellows. Itexists as a new species more akin to plants than any other lifeform. Feeding then becomes photosynthetic, paralytic, or, mostlikely, both. When slain, an olive slime creature dissolves into anew patch of olive slime.Olive slime is harmed only by add, freezing cold, fire, or by acure disease spell. Spells that affect plants will work on oliveslime, although entangle will have no practical effect, Greenslime and olive slime are complete opposites—when they en¬counter each other, the attack of one neutralizes the other.If an affected character has been transformed into an oliveslime creature, there is very little short of a limited wish that canreturn him to normal.Olive slime creatures, popularly known as "slime zombies" arethe end result of the metamorphosis upon the host. The newlyformed vegetable creature is linked symbioiicaily with the oliveslime patch that created it. The symbiotic bond is a secure linkwithin 200 miles, but not from one plane of existence to another.The olive slime can call its zombies to defend it from attack, andthey will immediately and mindlessly obey.Regardless of their former existence, and despite their generalform, slime creatures are only differentiated by size:Slime creatures have a telepathic bond, effective at a range of200 yards, and gather together for mutual assistance while feed¬ing or for defense. Their former identities can be discovered onlyupon close examination.Habitat varies from well-populated subterranean places todamp forests, swamps, and fens. Slime creatures are equally athome on land or in warm, shallow water. Slime zombies seek outanimal hosts for their slime; they attack man-sized creatures onsight. When they attack, olive slime zombies have a 10% chance,per successful hit, to infect an opponent with slime. If they suc¬ceed in doing so, they either change targets or flee combat beforekilling their target—they certainly do not want to kill the newhost.Olive slime zombies are harmed by acid, freezing cold, fire andmagic missile spells. Spells that affect plants will also affect them,although the effects of entangle are minimal at best. No otherattacks, by weapons, lightning, or spells that affect the mind willkill a slime creature. An olive slime zombie, however, can sufferonly as much physical damage as it has hit points, before its skel¬eton collapses and it becomes nothing more than a puddle of ol¬ive slime. When green slime is applied to an olive slime zombie, itneutralizes the olive slime, delivering 2d4 points of damage perround until the body is reduced to a (non-animate) skeleton.The vegetable intelligence of slime zombies is no greater thanthat of common animals, but does enable them to learn from ex¬perience, This innate intelligence extends to the use of simpletraps, and they will lie in wait at the bottom of hidden shafts.Mustard jelly originated when a young wizard attempted topolymorph herself into an ocher jelly. Her spell failed, and shebecame a mustard jelly The stuff has multiplied rapidly in theyears since her accident, and it is now a serious threat in manyareas,The monstrous amoeboid mustard jelly is far more dangerousthan the ocher jelly. Mustard jelly is translucent, and very hard tosee until it attacks. The only clue to its presence is a faint odor,similar to blooming mustard plants. Once it does attack, it maybe seen as yellowish brown in color.Normally, mustard jelly attacks by forming an acidic pseudo¬pod of its own substance and thrusting. The jelly monster se¬cretes a vapor over a 10-fool radius. Those near the jelly mustroll a saving throw vs. poison each round. Those who fail thesaving throw became lethargic and move at half-normal speed,due to the effects of the vapor. The toxic effects last for tworounds and they are cumulative.This large creature can divide itself at will into two smaller,faster halves (movement rate 18), Each is capable of attacking,but has only half the hit points the creature had before dividing,A mustard jelly can, for example, flow into a room, divide itselfinto independent halves to attack, and then reform into a toms inorder to surround a pillar its prey has climbed. Unlike the ocherjelly, mustard jelly cannot move through tiny spaces, nor can itmove along ceilings, although it will eat through wooden doors.It cannot climb walls either, and so most of its bulk must remainon the floor, stretching up only 4 or 5 feet.Although intelligent, mustard jelly is not known to value trea-sure of any sort, except as a lure for greedy adventurers. Ofcourse, it is possible that some treasure might remain after a vic¬tim has been devoured.Mustard jelly is impervious to normal weapons (and can eatwooden ones) and electrical attacks. A magic missile spell willonly cause it to grow; mustard jelly gains hit points equal in num¬ber to the damage rolled. Cold causes only half damage, and oth¬er attacks have normal effects.This relative of the gelatinous cube was designed by someforgotten mage to resemble a section of ordinary stone wall.They are usually about 10 feet square by 2 l /z to 5 feet thick, andsomewhat translucent. If a bright light is shone on one side of thestunjelly, it will be seen on the other. Illumination equal to a con¬tinuous light spell will reveal whatever treasure a stunjelly mightbe carrying, StunjeUies make no noise when they move, but theydo produce a faint odor of vinegar.The stunjelly has many features in common with the gelati¬nous cube. Like the cube, the stunjelly paralyzes creatures whoventure too close! Adventurers walking near a stunjelly may beattacked by an anaesthetic pseudopod; those struck must roll asaving throw vs. paralyzation, Those who succeed suffer no illeffects. Those who fail are paralyzed for 5d4 rounds, duringwhich time the stunjelly tries to surround the victim and digesthim. Like the gelatinous cube, it is immune to electrical attacks,mind-influencing spells, paralyzation, and polymorph spells.Unlike the gelatinous cube, stunjelly is affected normally by coldattacks.Stunjellies reproduce by fission, as one extremely thick jellysplits into two smaller ones. This process is accompanied by ahorrible, rending sound, audible throughout the vicinity.A stunjelly might mindlessly carry undigested metals aroundwith it for days. These would include treasure types J, K, L, M,N, and Q, as well as potions, daggers, or similar objects.Stunjellies are tolerated in many dungeons as traps for unwaryintruders, or as janitorial monsters sweeping the passages of di¬gestible litter. For this duty, they are preferred over other breedsof slime and ooze, since they cannot slither through doors intoareas where they would be unwelcome.
The oozes, slimes and jellies of the underworld are hideous,amorphous creatures that are the bane of all that lives, dissolvingthe weapons, armor, and flesh of their victims.This monster resembles a giant amoeba, seeping through dark*ened corridors, through cracks and under doors, searching forflesh or cellulose to devour. Their form allows them to travel onwalls and ceilings and drop on unsuspecting prey.Combat: The ochre jelly attacks by attempting to envelop itsprey. Its secretions dissolve flesh, inflicting 3-12 (dlQ + 2) points ofdamage per round of exposure. While a lightning holt will dividethe creature into one or more smaller jellies, each doing one-halfnormal damage, tire- and cold-based attacks have normal effects,Habita^Sodety: An asexual creature, the ochre jelly is a soli¬tary beast that Is occasionally found with its own divided off¬spring. It lives only to eat and reproduce.Ecology^ Voraciously dissolving all types of carrion and trash,this monster is sometimes tolerated in inhabited subterranean ar¬eas for its janitorial services, but this activity is difficult to orga¬nize and is usually not appreriated by the inhabitants because ofits dangerA slimy horror that looks like wet stone or a sedimentary rockformation, the gray ooze is rarely thicker than six or eight inches,but sometimes grows to a length of 12 feet, It cannot climb wallsor ceilings, so it slides* drips, and oozes along cavern floors,Combat: The gray ooze strikes like a snake, and can corrodemetal at an alarming rate (chain mail in one round, plate mail intwo, and magical armor in one round per each plus to ArmorClass). Spells have no effect on this monster, nor do fire- or cold-based attacks. Lightning and blows from weapons cause fulldamage. Note that weapons striking a gray ooze may corrodeand break.Habitat/Society; After a large meal, a gray ooze reproduces by"budding:" growing a small pod that is left behind in a corridoror cavern. This pod takes two to three days to mature and thenthe little gray ooze absorbs its leathery shell and begins slitheringabout, searching for a meal. Sometimes more than one of thesemonsters are found together, but this is just a random event be¬cause they are not intelligent,
Ecology; The gray ooze is a dungeon scavenger. It is rumoredthat metalworkers of extraordinary skill keep very small oozes instone jars to etch and score iheir metal work, but this is a delicateand dangerous practice.This creature is a variety of gray ooze which has adapted to liv¬ing in water. It is 7S% invisible when immersed in its natural ele¬ment, It is translucent, mostly glassy clear, with an occasionalmilky white swirl in its substance.Combat; Crystal ooze strikes like a snake, then attempts toflow over a victim and exude its paralyzing poison, Unlike itscousin, the gray ooze, this creature does not corrode metal, butits poisons attack wood, doth, and flesh. Unless a victim success¬fully saves vs. poison, he becomes paralyzed and will be con*sutried by the crystal ooze in a short time. When prey is reducedto -20 hit points, it is totally consumed. Crystal ooze cannot beharmed by acid, cold, heat, or fire attacks, but electricity andmagic missiles inflict full damage. Blows from weapons Inflictonly 1 point of damage per hit. A wooden weapon must save vs,acid or it will dissolve and break.Habitat Society; Crystal oozes live in any dim or dark body ofwater, though they can exist out of water for several hours. Theyreproduce by budding, like the gray ooze, but the crystal podsusually take seven to 10 days to hatch. Crystal oozes will eattheir offspring, but occasionally if the body of water is largeenough and food is not scarce, a few of them might be foundliving in the same water.Ecology; Crystal oozes are scavengers that leave metal andstone objects in their wake, so incidental treasure can often befound around and in their lairs,So nearly transparent that they are difficult to see, Lhese cubestravel down dungeon corridors, absorbing carrion and trashalong the way. Their sides glisten, tending to leave a slimy trail,but gelatinous cubes cannot climb walls or cling to ceilings. Verylarge cubes grow tall to gamer mosses and the like from ceilings.Combat; A gelatinous cube attacks by touching its victim withIts anesthetizing slime, A victim who fails to save vs. paralyza-tion is paralyzed (anesthetized) for 5-20 (5d4) rounds. The cubethen surrounds its prey and secretes digestive fluids to absorb thefood. All damage is caused by these digestive acids. Because ge¬latinous cubes are difficult to see, others are -3 on their surpriseroll. Electricity, fear, holds, paralyzation, polymorph^ and sleep-based attacks have no effect on this monster, but fire and blowsfrom weapons have normal effects. If a cube fails its savingthrow against a cold-based attack, the cube will be slowed 50%and inflicts only 1-4 points of damage.Habitat Society: Possessing no intelligence, gelatinous cubeslive only for eating. They prefer well- traveled dungeons wherethere is always food to scavenge, These creatures reproduce bybudding, leaving dear, rubbery cubes in dark comers or onheaps of trash. Young are not protected and are sometimes reab¬sorbed by the parent. Treasure is sometimes swept up by a gelati¬nous cube as the creature travels along a cavern floor; anymetals, gems, or jewelry are carried in the monsters body untilthey can be ejected as indigestible. Items found inside a cube in¬clude treasure types ], K, L, M. N, Q, as well as an occasionalpotion, dagger, or similar object.Ecology: The gelatinous cube is sometimes encouraged to stayin a certain area for its scavenging abilities, and is preferred overother jellies and oozes since its square shape does not allow it toslither under doors and into areas in which it is not desired.A hideous growth, green slime is bright green, sticky and wet. Itgrows in dark subterranean places on walls, ceilings and Floors.Combat: This slime cannot attack but is sensitive to vibrationsand often drops from the ceiling onto a passing victim. Greenslime attaches itself to living flesh and in 1-4 melee rounds turnsthe creature into green slime (no resurrection possible). Greenslime eats through one inch of wood in an hour, but can dissolvemetal quickly, going through plate armor in three melee rounds.The horrid growth can be scraped off quickly cut away, frozen,or burned. A cure disease spell kills green slime, but other at¬tacks, including weapons and spells, have no effect.Habitat Society: Green slime hates light and feeds on animal,vegetable, and metallic substances in dark caverns. Since it can¬not move, this slime grows only when food comes to it. Sunlightdries it out and eventually kills it. Occasional huge slimes or col¬onies of dozens have been reported.Ecology: Green slime is an infestation that all creatures avoid;it is burned out of caverns or mines if found. Once it has infectedan area, it has a tendency to grow back, even after being frozenor burned away because dormant spores can germinate yearslater.
Slithering trackers are transparent, plasma-draining jellies foundin many dungeons and other dark places.They are not invisible per se, hut are instead made of a trans¬parent jelly-like material. Thus they are almost impossible to de¬tect normally (only a 5% chance of happening to notice one).Combat: The unique nature of slithering trackers gives themthe distinct advantage of being able to slip through cracks andholes as small as a rat hole. They move completely silently acrossa!! surfaces, simply oozing slowly over all bumps and turns.They prefer to attack sleeping, solitary or unconscious creatures,as their main weakness lies in the extended duration of their at¬tack form. They secrete a paralyzing substance that immobilizesthe victim on contact for 12 hours if a saving throw vs. paraiyza¬tion fails. The slithering tracker then covers the entire body of itsvictim and slowly draws all of the plasma from the creature (kill¬ing the victim in the process, of course). It can drain a man-sizedcreature in one hour.Habitat Society: Slithering trackers are solitary beasts. Sincethey possess no attack form capable of harming other trackers,territoriality is a question of first-come, first-serve. Being themost intelligent of all slimes and jellies, it would seem naturalthat slithering trackers would establish themselves as the leadersof the rest. But jellies and slimes lack both the means of commun¬ication and the intelligence to band together. They remain on thelower end of the monster food chain, serving as scavengers thatkill the weak and stupid, leaving the larger creatures for majorpredators in the dungeons they inhabit.In fact, slithering trackers often hide themselves in the lairs oflarge monsters, which are known to kill far more than they caneat at a sitting. The tracker waits until the beast goes to sleep ordeparts and then it sucks dry the morsels left over. Many timesthe victims are merely unconscious instead of dead—at least untilthe tracker gets to them. And on more than one occasion.monster-slaying players have left a hoard guarded by a comrade,while they go for help, only to return to find their friend mysteri¬ously dehydrated, with all of the treasure still in the IainEcology: There are two theories regarding the origin of slither¬ing trackers. The first and most likely one is that slithering track*ers are just advanced forms of the other jellies, fortunate enoughto have developed a transparent plasma body and a modicum ofintelligence. Like most jellies, they reproduce a sexually when thetime and quantity of food allow for it.The second, more dubious theory, is that slithering trackerswere created, not bom. Their high intelligence seems to leadmany knowledgeable sages to believe that the creation of a slith¬ering tracker is a hideous process, involving the transformationof a living human being. Certain legends seem to support thisassertion, as there are many accounts of dark wizards removingthe bones of their enemies, turning them into hulking masses ofjelly-like flesh. While it is certain that no respectable wizard(good or neutrally aligned) would resort to creating such horrors,it is just as certain that there are many practitioners of the darkerarts who have performed much worse experiments*It is possible that somewhere deep in the bowels of some long-deserted wizard's dungeon, there lies an ancient diary, with a de¬tailed account of the terrifying curse of the tracker.There are tales of abnormally large slithering trackers that livein the deep recesses of the Underdark. Such monsters are oftensaid to lurk around the edges of great underground civilizations*growing to vast size on the abundance of prey.
Ores are a species of aggressive mammalian carnivores that bandtogether in tribes and survive by hunting and raiding. Ores be¬lieve that in order to survive they must expand their territory,and so they are constantly involved in wars against many ene¬mies: humans, elves, dwarves, goblins, and other ore tribes.Ores vary widely in appearance, as they frequently crossbreedwith other species. In general, they resemble primitive humanswith grey-green skin covered with coarse hair. Ores have a slight¬ly stooped posture, a low jutting forehead, and a snout instead ofa nose, though comparisons between this facial feature and thoseof pigs are exaggerated and perhaps unfair. Ores have well-developed canine teeth for eating meat and short pointed earsthat resemble those of a wolf, Orcish snouts and ears have aslightly pink tinge. Their eyes are human, with a reddish tint thatsometimes makes them appear to glow red when they reflect dimlight sources in near darkness. This is actually part of their opti¬cal system, a pigment which gives them infravision, Male oresare about 5 l fz to 6 feet tall. Females average 6 inches shorter thanmales. Ores prefer to wear colors that most humans think un¬pleasant: blood red, rust red, mustard yellow, yellow green,moss green, greenish purple, and blackish brown. Their armor isunattractive besides—dirty and often a bit rusty. Ores speak Orc¬ish, a language derived from older human and elvish languages.There is no common standard of Orcish, so the language hasmany dialects which vary from tribe to tribe. Ores have alsolearned to speak local common tongues, but are not comfortablewith them. Some ores have a limited vocabulary in goblin, hob¬goblin. and ogre dialects.Polearms are typically either halberds, pikes (seL to receivecharge), or glaives. Leaders typically possess two weapons. If asubchief is present, there is a 40% chance the ores will be fightingaround a standard. The presence of this standard increases attackrolls and morale by +1 for all ores within 60 yards. Ores typi¬cally wear studded leather armor and a shield (AC 6).Ores hate direct sunlight and fight at -1 penalty to their attackrolls in sunlight. Their morale decreases by 1 under these circum¬stances as well. Ores employ sniping and ambush tactics in thewild. They do not obey the "'rules of war " unless such is in theirbest interests; for example, they will shoot at those who attemptto parlay with them under a white flag unless the ore leader feelsit is advantageous to hear what the enemy has to say. They abusehuman rules of engagement and chivalry to their best advantage.They have a historic enmity against elves and dwarves: manytribes will kill these demihumans on sight,Et is often believed that ores are so bloodthirsty and cruel thatthey are ineffective tacticians and that they would rather be vi¬cious than victorious. Like most stereotypes, this is highly mis¬leading; it is true for some ore tribes but not for all. Many oretribes have waged wars for decades and have developed a fright¬ening efficiency with battle tactics.Combat: Ores are constantly in battle, They use the followingweapons.Habita^Society: For every three ores encountered, there will bea leader and three assistants. These ores will have 8 hit pointseach, being the meanest and strongest in the group. If 150 ores ormore are encountered there will be the following additional fig¬ures with the band: a subchief and 3-18 guards, each with Armor
Class 4,11 hit points, and +1 damage due to Strength on all at¬tacks, They fight as monsters of 2 Hit Dice (THAC0 19), For eve¬ry 100 ores encountered, there will be either a shaman (maximum5th level priest) or a witch doctor (maximum 4th-level mage).Shamans and witch doctors gain an extra ]d4 hit points for eachlevel above 1st and fight as a monster of 1 Hit Dio for every twolevels (round fractions up) of spell-casting ability (e.g,, a 5 th-level shaman has d8 + 4d4 hit points and fights as a 3 Hit Dicemonster.)[f the ores are not in their lair, there is a 20% chance they willbe escorting a train of 1-6 carts and 10-60 slave bearers bringingsupplies, loot, or ransom and tribute to their ore chief or astronger ore tribe. The total value of the goods carried by all ofthe carts will vary between 10 and 1.000 silver pieces, and eachslave bearer will bear goods valued between 5 and 30 silver piec¬es, If the ores are escorting a treasure train, double the number ofleaders and assistants and add 10 ora for each cart in the train;one subchief with 5^30 guards will always be in charge.Ore lairs are underground 75% of the time, in a wilderness vil¬lage 25% of the time. Ore communities range from small fortswith 100-400 ores to mining communities with 500-3,000 ora tohuge cities {partially underground and partially above ground)with 2,000 to 20,000 ores. There will always be additional oreswhen the encounter is in a creature's lair: a chief and 5-30 body¬guards (AC 4, 13-16 hit points, attack as monsters with 3 HitDice (THAC0 171 and inflict an extra +2 damage on all attacksdue to Strength). If the lair is underground, there is a 50% chancethat 2-5 ogres per 200 ores will be living with them. Most lairsabove ground are rude villages of wooden huts protected by aditch, log rampart and log palisade, or more advanced construc¬tions built by other races. The village will have 1-4 watch towersand a single gate. There wilt be one balllsta and one catapult torevery 100 adult male ores.Ores are aggressive. They believe other species are inferior tothem and that bullying and slavery is part of the natural order.They will cooperate with other species but are not dependable: asslaves, they will rebel against all but the most powerful masters;as allies they are quick to take offense and break agreements.Ores believe that battle is the ideal challenge, but some leadersare pragmatic enough to recognize the value of peace, which theyexact at a high price. If great patience and care are used, oretribes can be effecti ve trading partners and military allies.Ores value territory above all else; battle experience, wealth,and number of offspring are other major sources of pride. Oresare patriarchal; women are fit only to bear children and nursethem. Ores have a reputation for cruelty that is deserved, buthumans are just as capable of evil as ores, Ores have marriagecustoms, but ore males are not noted for their faithfulness.Ores worship many deities (some who have different namesamong different tribes): the chief deity is usually a giant, one-eyed ore. Ordsh religion is extremely hateful toward other spe-des and urges violence and warfare. Ore shamans have beennoted for their ambition, and many tribes have suffered becauseof political infighting between warriors and priests.Ecology: Ores have an average lifespan of 40 years. Theyhave a gestation period of 10 months and produce two to threeoffspring per birth. Infant mortality is high. Ores are carni¬vores, but prefer game meats or livestock to demihumans andhumanoids.It is said tha t ores have no natural enemies, but they work hardto make up for this lack. Ore tribes have fearsome names such asVile Rune, Bloody Head, Broken Bone, Evil Eye, and DrippingBlade.Ora are skilled miners who can spot new and unusual con¬structions 35 % of the time and sloping passages 25% of the time.They are also excellent weaponsmiths.Elite ores, or orogs, are a race of great ores, possibly mixed withogre blood. Orogs range between 6 and 6 Vi feet tall. They arehighly disciplined warriors and have their own standards andbanners which they display prominently—il is usually easy to tellwhen orogs are present among common ores. Orogs can befound at the vanguard of large ore armies, but rarely on patrol.There is a 10% chance that an ore tribe will have orogs, whosenumber equals 10% of the male population. (Thus a communityof 3,000 male ora has a 10% dhance of having 300 additionalorogs.) Small bands of elites (20-80 orogs I will hire themselvesout as mercenaries. Orogs have 3 Hit Dice, plate mall (AC 3),and have a +3 Strength bonus on damage dice. For every 20orogs, there will also be one leader with 4 Hit Dice (THAC0 17).There is but one orog chief, who has 5 Hit Dice (THAC0 15).Orogs use weaponry common to ora, but will typically possesstwo weapons apiece.Ores will crossbreed with virtually every humanoid and demi-human species except elves, with whom they cannot. The mon¬grel offspring of ora and these other spedes are known ashalf-ores. Orc-goblins, ore-hobgoblins, and orc-humans are themost common. Half-ores tend to favor the orcish strain heavily,and as such are basically ores, although 10% of these offspringcan pass as ugly humans, They are treated as humans with levelsinstead of Hit Dice. If multi-classed, they have these maxitnums:priest, 4th level; fighter, 10th level; thief, 8th level.If half-ores remain single-classed, these maximums increase to:priest, 7th level (Wisdom 15 required for 5fh, Wisdom 16 for 6th,Wisdom 17 for 7th); fighter, 17th level (Strength 18/00 requiredfor 11th. Strength 19 for 12th, Strength 20 for 14th, and Strength21 for 17th); thief, llth level (Dexterity 15 required for9th, Dex¬terity 16 for 10th, and Dexterity 17 for llth).Half-ores are distrusted by both human and ore cultures be¬cause they remind each of the other's racial stock. Half-ores ad¬vance in ore culture by flaunting their superior ability and inhuman culture by associating with people who don't care aboutappearance. Most tend toward neutrality with slight lawful andevil tendencies, but lawful good half-ores are not unknown.Some half-ores have split from both cultures to form their ownsocieties in remote areas. These half-ores worship their own godsand (like most hermits) are extremely suspicious of strangers.
Otyughs (Aw-tee-ug), also known as the gulguthra, are terrifyingcreatures that lurk in heaps of dung and decay, waiting for some¬thing to disturb it* There are two varieties, the regular otyugh,and its larger, more intelligent offshoot, the neo-otyugh. Theyfeed on dung and wastes from other dungeon creatures(gulguthra means "dung eaters'') but also enjoy an occasionalsnack of fresh meat.Otyughs have huge, bloated bodies covered with a rock-likeskin that is brownish gray in color, which is in turn covered withdung. They stand on three thick legs that give them slow groundmovement but enable them to pivot quickly. They have threeeyes on a leaf-like stalk that moves quickly from side to side, ena¬bling them to scan a large area. The eye stalk is also a receiver/transmitter for their telepathic abilities, Otyughs have a hugemouth with very sharp teeth m the center of their mass. Theyalso have two tentacles with leaf-like ridges that they use tosmash and grapple their opponents. The tentacles are coveredwith rough thorn-like projections. Neo-otyughs have smallermouths than otyughs,Otyughs and neo-otyughs speak their own language, much olwhich is non-verbal (movements of eye stalk and tentacles, oremission of certain smells}- they also have limited telepathy thatenable them to communicate with other creatures. Otyughs reekof dung and decay.Combat; Otyughs lurk under piles of offal with only their eyesexposed. They usually attack if they feel threatened, or if theyare hungry and there is fresh meat nearby. They attack with theirtwo ridged tentacles, which either smash an opponent or grappleit. Grappled opponents suffer 2-4 points of damage per round.Otyughs' bite attacks gain a +2 bonus to the attack roll whenbiting grappled opponents, Otyughs smash grappled opponentsto the ground, while the more intelligent neo-otyughs use theirvictims as shields, bettering their Armor Class by 1, Neo-otyughsmay also force attackers to hit the grappled character with a suc¬cessful attack roll of its own (vs. the grappled characters AO; todo this the neo-otyugh forgoes its squeeze attack. Characterswith a Strength of at least 18 can struggle for one round and auto¬matically break free: others must make a successful open doorsroll to escape.Both types of gulguthra are disease-ridden: their bite is 00%likely to infect the character with a debilitating (80% ) or fatal(20%) disease. Otyughs are immune to these diseases.Habitat/Society: All gulguthra have Limited telepathic ability. Anotyugh can communicate with creatures up to 40 feet away, whilea neo-otyugh can communicate with creatures as distant as 60feet. Communication is usually limited to simple feelings andemotions such as hunger, temperature conditions and associateddiscomforts, its dislike of bright lights, and imminent death forits prey. Gulguthra also have infravision with a 90-foot range.Otyughs and neo-otyughs live in ruins and dungeons. They makedeals with other dungeon denizens, agreeing not to attack them inexchange for their dung and body wastes, which they then devour.To keep the supply of waste coming (and to get fresh meat) they willagree to help defend their home against intruders, which includesmany adventurers. Otyughs may be persuaded not to attack crea¬tures in exchange for promises of friendship and food, Neo-otyughsare less trusting (and more vicious), and usually attack intruders onsight. An otyugh s dungeon allies will sometimes ask it to guard trea¬sure for them. Most gulguthra live alone; 10% of the time, duringmating season, two gulguthra can found in its lair.Ecology: Otyughs and neo-otyughs live underground in heapsof offal and refuse. They hate bright sunlight, preferring the com¬fortable darkness of dungeons. They mate each year for onemonth, with one offspring produced. It takes the newborn Fourmonths to mature (immature gulguthra have 3-5 HD, damage1-6/T6/T2, and a Strength of 16 is required to break free of theirgrasp). Otyughs are so disgusting that no alchemist or wizardwould want to touch their components, so the corpses of thegulguthra have no known use or value.
Owlbears are probably the crossbred creation of a demented wiz¬ard; given the lethality of this creation, it is quite likely that thewizard who created them is no longer alive, Owlbears are vi¬cious. ravenous, aggressive, and evil tempered at all times.Owlbears are a cross between a giant owl and a bear. They arecovered with a thick coat of feathers and fur, brown-black toyellow-brown in color. The 8-foot-tali males, which weigh be¬tween 1,300 and 1,500 pounds, are darker colored. The beaks ofthese creatures are yellow to ivory and their terrifying eyes arered-rimmed. Owlbears speak their own language, which consistsof very loud screeches of varying length and pitch.Combat: The owlbear attacks prey on sight, always Fightingto the death (ignore morale rating for purposes of determiningretreat). It attacks with its claws and snapping beak. If anowlbear scores a daw hit with a roll of 18 or better, it drags itsvictim into a hug, subsequently squeezing its opponent for 2-16points of damage per round until either the victim or theowlbear is slain. The owlbear can also use its beak attack onvictims caught in its grasp, but cannot use its daws. A singleattempt at a bend bars/lift gates roll may be made to breakfrom the grasp of an owlbear. Note that if the Armor Class of avictim is high enough that 18 is insufficient to hit, the hug is noteffective and no damage is taken.Habitat .'Society: Owlbears inhabit the depths of tangled forestsin temperate climes, as well as subterranean labyrinths, living incaves or hollow stumps.Owlbears live in mated pairs; the male is slightly larger andheavier than the female. If encountered in their lair there is a 25 %chance that there will be 1-6 eggs (20%) or young {BQ %) in addi¬tion to the adults. The offspring will be 40% to 70% grown andfight as creatures with three or four Hit Dice, depending on theirgrowth. They have hit points based on their adjusted Hit Dice.Immature offspring inflict 1-4/1-4/2-8 points of damage withtheir attacks and a character has a +20% to his bend bars/liftgates roll to escape the hug of an immature owlbear.An owlbear pair claims a territory of one or two square milesand will vigorously defend this territory against all intruders.An owlbear’s main weakness is also its greatest strength—itsferocity Because owlbears are so bad-tempered, they stop atnothing to kill a target. It is not difficult to trick an owlbear intohurling itself off a cliff or into a trap, provided you can find one.Ecology: Owlbears have a lifespan of 20 years. They are warm¬blooded mammals, but lay eggs. They prey on anything, fromrabbits to bears, to trolls, to snakes and reptiles. Owlbears prefertemperate climates, but some thrive in subarctic environments.As a hybrid of two animals, one diurnal and the other nocturnalthey have an unusual active time, waking at noon, hunting ani¬mals active during the day, then hunting nocturnal creatures be¬fore going to sleep at midnight. Owlbears are active in thesummer months and hibernate during the cold season. There arerumors of white arctic owlbears, a cross between arctic owls andpolar bears, but no specimens have ever been captured.An owlbear does not actively seek treasure but the remains ofvictims may be found buried in shallow holes around an owlbearlair. Owlbear eggs are worth 2,000 silver pieces and hatchlingsare worth 5,000 silver pieces on the open market. These are typi¬cally bought by wizards* while they are impossible to domesti¬cate, they make formidable guardians and wizards sometimesplace them in locations of strategic importance (it has been saidthat an owlbear is a less subtle version of a 'keep out" sign},Owlbears in dungeons and ruins almost always have been placedthere by someone.
Pegasi are magnificent winged steeds that often serve the cause ofgood. These intelligent creatures are very shy and wild, not easi¬ly tamed. They serve only good characters, and when they do,they will serve their master with absolute faithfulness for the restof his life.A pegasus is a thoroughbred which resembles an Arabian horse(though slightly larger) with two large leathered wings. Pegasi areusually white, but brown pegasi are not unknown, and rumorspersist of black pegasi- As should be expected, alignments do notvary according to color (all pegasi are chaotic good), Pegasi are 17hands tall (5 feet at the shoulder) and weigh over 1,500 pounds.Pegasi must be ridden bareback; they will not accept saddles.Pegasi speak their own language and can communicate withhorses. They can understand common, and will obey their master’scommands if they are given in that language.Combat: A pegasus attacks with its hooves and teeth. It can at¬tack an opponent who is behind it with its rear hooves, inflicting2-12 points of damage, but it cannot use any of its other attacksin that round. A pegasus can also dive at an opponent fromheights of 50 feet or higher and use its hoof attacks; each attackroll is +2 and does double damage.In battle, a pegasus will try to lure larger opponents (such asdragons) Into tight spaces. As the opponent struggles to maneu¬ver into attack range, the pegasus climbs and attacks with itshooves from above. Against creatures their own size, such asgriffons, pegasi use their superior speed to outrun them, if grif¬fons are close to a pegasus nest (especially if there are youngpresent), one parent will attack aggressively, get the griffon's at¬tention, and then fly away, By doing this, they hope to lure ene¬mies away from the nest and tire them out over a long distancebefore returning home.Habitat Society: Pegasi are egg-laying mammals. If encoun¬tered in their lair, there will be one nest for every pair of pegasi.There is a 20% chance per nest that there will be 1-2 eggs (30%chance) or young (70%) of 20-50% maturity. Each egg is worth3,000 silver pieces, while the young are worth 5,000 silver piecesper head on the open market.A pegasus can be used as a warhorse; a male can carry weightas a medium warhorse (220/330/440), while a female can carryweight as a light warhorse (170/255/340).Pegasi are intelligent creatures. They can defect good and de¬tect evil at will (60 yard range). They use these powers on thosewho would ride them; they try to throw anyone of non-goodalignments who would tame them. If provoked, pegasi will nothesitate to attack creatures whom they perceive as evil.To tame a pegasus, a person of good alignment must locate apegasus herd. Then, at night, he can try to sneak up on a pegasusand surprise it. The character must have the airborne riding pro¬ficiency. There is an initial +10 penalty to the roll; pegasi do notlike to be tamed, A magical bridle enchanted for the purpose willremove this penalty. If the character successfully makes his roll,then the pegasus will be tamed,A tamed pegasus will obey the commands of its master for aslong as it lives, if the master remains of good alignment.Ecology: Pegasi feed on grass, fruits, and other plants. Griffonsand hippogriffs are the natural enemies of a pegasus. Pegasi havea lifespan of about 40 years.Legend has it that if a medusa is slain and beheaded, there is asmall (5%) chance that a greater pegasus will be bom, springingfully bom from the medusa’s cloven neck. These pegasi have thesame attacks and movement rate of a normal pegasus but areworth 6 Hit Dice and have 20% magic resistance. They also havea +1 bonus to their morale rating. There is a 5 % chance that theleader of a herd of pegasi will be a greater pegasus. Greater pegasican be tamed only by the noblest and greatest of heroes, andhave a lifespan of 100 years.
High above the mountains and rocky hills of most lands flies asharp-eyed monster known as the peryton. Intelligent, patient,and malevolent, it watches and waits for prey—to pluck theirhearts out.The peryton resembles a giant, dark green eagle, except that itshead is that of a blue-black stag, its horns glitter as ebon as obsid¬ian, its eyes glow a dull red-orange. The chest feathers of a maleperyton are light blue: those of the female are drab brown. Pery¬tons normally cast the shadow of an adult human being, ratherthan those of their own form*Perytons do not adorn themselves with trinkets, nor armthemselves with weapons. Their language is a collection of roarsand screeches, and often sounds as it a peryton were either in¬jured or enraged. Some creatures, with a keen sense of smell,claim that a peryton smells like a human, while others are filledwith an irrational fear upon catching first scent.Combat: A peryton has only a secondary interest in prey as food*Its main interest in humans and humanoid creatures is the heartof its prey. It is unnaturally accurate in combat, In game terms aperyton receives a + 2 bonus to its attack roll,It attacks with its sharp horns, since its claws are too weak touse in melee. When a peryton chooses a target for combat, itlocks itself into a duel that nearly always ends in either the pery¬ton s death or that of its target* A peryton will never switch tar¬gets during combat, no matter the tactical situation. On rareoccasions, the creature can be driven off, but it will continue tostalk its prey, and return at a later time.Perytons are immune to all weapons but those of at least +1enchantment*Some perytons choose to swoop at a target* In this form of attack,the peryton climbs several hundred feet in the air and then plunges atthe target, dropping with awesome speed. This attack is made at anadditional +2 bonus to it s attack roll. If the attack succeeds, theperyton delivers double damage. This is an extreme maneuver thatthe peryton will only attempt if combat is going ptsorly, or if it be¬lieves it has a chance to achieve total surprise.Another common tactic is for the peryton to seize a human¬sized target and then lift off with the prey in its talons. The pery¬ton climbs so rapidly that most targets do not react until they areat least 100 feet in the air and facing a 10d6 plummet if they man¬age to escape the peryton s grasp,Habitat/Society: Perytons roost in caves high atop cliffs or onmountain peaks. They settle in nests of 2d4 creatures, each nestindependent of any other, and no two nests being within severalmiles of one another, except for unusual circumstances—like adwarven community in the mountains providing them with plen¬tiful prey,Perytons sometimes take humans and humanoid creaturesalive and hold them captive in their nests until they are needed asfood (90% likely for nonhumans, 25 % the case for humans) orfor reproduction (see below). Because of this, the peryton nestsmay have treasure scattered about, as well as Xd4 unhatchedeggs*Ecology: The peryton is a predator, with no natural enemies (fewcould pierce its magically resistant skin). Humanoids, and espe¬cially humans, are its selected prey A female peryton requires afresh, beating heart to reproduce, and human hearts are the pre¬ferred variety. Once a peryton has eaten a heart, its shadowchanges into that of its normal form and the creature becomesfertile for 3d6 hours.Unhatched peryton eggs can be sold for 10dl2 gp apiece.
Phantoms are images left behind by particularly strong deathtraumas. A phantom is like a three-dimensional movie imagefilmed at the time of death, in the place where it died.The standard phantom may appear as almost anything. It of¬ten appears as the character who experienced the trauma-a trans¬parent image re-enacting the death scene. Alternatively it couldrepresent whatever was foremost in the victim's mind at the timeot death: an attacker, or some goal left unachieved. Phantomsare experienced in faded colors, by all senses.Combat: It is difficult to fight phantoms, since they are merelyimages and have no power to directly cause harm. They cannotthemselves be harmed. Swinging weapons or casting spells intothe area of the image does not interfere with the projection, andthey cannot be reasoned with. A phantom is not intelligent anddoes not exist for any real reason: tracking down its killer orcompleting its quest will not get rid of a phantom.Phantoms are often mistaken lor ghosts, haunts, or groaningspirits, but they can not be turned as undead, Only a priest spellremove curse , cast at 12th level, can dispel a phantom.Although a phantom cannot directly do any actual harm, it isthe very essence of magic and calls up a superstitious awe in any¬one who sees one. The enchantment is such that the phantomaffects both the mind and the senses of the observer. Creatureswithout minds {such as undead) are immune to the effects ofphantoms, as are those rare beings who are somehow unable toexperience them (since the phantom is present to all senses, blind¬ness is not normally protection against one).Characters witnessing a phantom must roll a successful savingthrow vs. death magic, with a -2 penalty or immediately panicand run away as per the effects of a fear spell. Particularly vividphantoms may require those who fail their saving throw to makea system shock roll with a +10 bonus to the roll Failure resultsin death for the unfortunate victim. Such a character can beraised normally, however.There are other difficulties with the fear effect: the cause of thephantom s death might still be around. Even after centuries, trapsand undead monsters can be just as effective and deadly, and run¬ning away in panic is usually not the best defense.Of course, a phantom may provide characters with importantInformation, either forewarning careful characters of an upcom¬ing danger, or finding a lost and treasured object.There is a slight chance that a character's death may engendera phantom. This chance should be minuscule to nonexistent for0-level or very low-level characters, or for those who were ex¬pecting to die-those dying of natural causes or in war. However,characters ol 4th level or above, dying suddenly or by surprisemight have a 1-2% chance of becoming phantoms. If thosecharacters were on an important mission or were subject to geasor quest spells, this chance might rise to 5-6 percent. The per¬centage chance for generating a phantom should never be high¬er than the level of the character at the time of death.(Characters killed by energy-draining undead rarely producephantoms.) It is up to the DM to decide what the precise imagepresents, A character who is murdered and generates a phan¬tom may also return as a revenant.There are nonstandard types of phantoms that affect only oneof the senses. Often, these are purely visual images, but they canalso manifest themselves as sounds (explosions, moaning, or qui¬et whispering) or smells. Most of these phantoms require savingthrows, but the effects of failure may differ, A gloomy whisper¬ing of danger might produce despair (as per the symbol spells)effects, A foul stench might induce the reLching effects of a ghasLSuffocating pressure, temperature extremes, the sounds of aswarm of bats, might all carry different consequences of failingthe saving throw.Of greater concern, however is that there are some phantomsthat are actually evil, created when powerful evil creatures fromother planes are ' slain ' (forced to return to their home planes) inthe Prime material plane. These phantoms appear at the will ofthe evil creature 35% of the time, and can seriously misinform orendanger any character it meets. These phantoms can be detectedwith a detect evil spell; dispel evil can neutralize the phantom fora number of turns equal to the caster's level.
The phoenix is a great, extra-planar bird thought to represent thespirit of freedom and rebirth. It is a mortal creature that displaysthe ultimate in godlike detachment.A phoenix appears as a large bird with a 40 r wingspan andbright, multi-colored feathers. The plumage includes bright vio¬let, scarlet, crimson and flaming orange. Its beak and daws areot blue-violet. A phoenixs eyes are a deep, glowing ruby colorIn addition to its own language, a phoenix can speak with allavians. It otherwise communicates with a limited telepathy or byempathy.Combat: The phoenix is a free and benevolent spirit and does notderive pleasure from attacking others. But if the need for combatarises, a phoenix is a swift and powerful foe. It can attack in theair with two powerful claws inflicting 1-8 points of damage perstrike. When on the ground it attacks with its great beak for 2-12points of damage per hit. The phoenix is an intelligent and magi-cal beast, however, so it usually opts for more effective measuresof attack and defense,A phoenix will always open up each round of combat with apiercing shriek that gives the creature an edge in the combatround. All opponents of 12 hit dice or less within 30 feet of ashrieking phoenix receive a +3 penalty on their initiative dice.The shriek does not affect the phoenix's combat roles in any way.Every phoenix has the following spell-like powers, at 20th levelof magic use, usable once per round, one at a time, at will:+ veil, 1 time per day% wall of fire, 1 time per dayAlso, by spreading its wings and performing a ritual dance, thephoenix can perform the following spell-like abilities at 40th levelof magic use:• woodland beings , 1 time per day% color spray. 3 times per dayAny of these three abilities can be used by a phoenix as manytimes as desired, but can only be done one at a time and eachtakes a full round to complete. No other activities—such as ashriek—can be done in conjunction with these three powers.A touch of its wing is equal to a cure light wounds spell, with 2touches possible per individual per day per phoenix, A touch ofthe comb gives an effect equal to cure disease , but only once perday per person.When hard-pressed, the phoenix is able to cause spilled drop¬lets of its own blood to act as fire seeds of the holly berry type,one being created for every five points of damage taken by thephoenix.
In extreme situations, the phoenix can create a 40th-level com¬bination of fire storm (20' high * 5' wide * 8' deep) and incendi¬ary cloud, even if it has already used these powers previously.This destroys the adult phoenix but leaves behind a young phoe¬nix with all the powers and abilities of its predecessor.The phoenix can travel astrally or ethereally at will. They arehit only by + 3 or better magical weapons. The phoenix can nev¬er be surprised. It has infravision to 120 feet.Habitat Society: Phoenixes are strange and enigmatic creatures.They are held in very high regard in the legends of many tribes ofbarbarians and in other, primitive cultures. It is said that the phoenixis the embodiment ot rebirth. This U symbolized in the classic imag¬ery' of the sell-immolation of the phoenix from which a new bird isformed. This is seen as the ultimate sacrifice for the cause ot goodand thus the phoenix are considered noble creatures.Legend states that the phoenix has an extremely long lifespan.Some reports claim they can live to be over 1 ,000 years old, whileothers suggest it to be as high as 12,000 years. When it is time forthe phoenix to die, it goes far into the mountains away from civi¬lization. At the very top of these peaks, the phoenix builds agreat nest made of straw and various herbs. The phoenix will liein the nest, taking its last look at the world it knows. Satisfiedthat its work in the world is at an end, it then immolates itself in aflash of great flame and light. When the Barnes die down, there inthe nest, which remains untouched by flames, is a young phoenixarrayed in bright colors like its parent before it. Legend then sug¬gests that the phoenix must fly away to the temple of the sun andthere bury the mummified corpse of its parent.In general, phoenixes are reclusive creatures, tending to maketheir lairs away from the worlds of humanoid beings. Thoughthey have the ability to travel through the Astral and Etherealplanes (and thus to any inner and outer plane), they will gener¬ally tend to stay on Elysium or in a secluded place on the PrimeMaterial plane.There are as many legends of the phoenix as there are cultures,each with its own slightly differing viewpoint. Some believe thephoenix to be the benevolent symbol of death, only appearing whensomeone's time is up among the living. Other cultures—primarilyevil—see the phoenix as the symbol of destruction and rage, bring¬ing fiery devastation in its wake, Still other cultures record theirphoenix to be a friend and benefactor of good beings,Although a wealth of mystery surrounds the phoenix, still thereare some things that are known for sure. It is obvious that the phoe¬nix is a champion of good. Although is seems these creatures do notactively seek out evil to destroy, they will rarely pass up such anopportunity when it presents itself. Also, despite the vast differencesin ideology, belief, and philosophy in the various cultures that reverethe phoenix, one thing remains constant: the phoenix is the symbolof creation by destruction. Some cultures believe that lire is the onegreat purifier, cleansing all that it touches. Others believe that firesmerely destroys. With the phoenix, both are true. In its own repro¬duction, fires destroys the old bird, taking with it many centuries oflife and wisdom, yet ii creates a new phoenix with a new- mind, thuspurifying the line.Ecology: Of all magical or enchanted creatures, the phoenix isperhaps most sought after by alchemists and sages alike. There isalmost no part of a phoenix that cannot be used in a magical po¬tion or for research.The feathers of the phoenix have a great many uses. They canbe used to adorn a staff of healing, they can be used to makepotions of extra-healing, and have many other healing, magic us¬es, The eyes, beak, and talons of a phoenix are very valuable jnthe open market, often commanding 5,000 gp and up Of courseit is not always easy to find a buyer on the open market, becausemany cultures consider it a bad omen or taboo violation to kill aphoenix,The exact nature of the phoenix can only be guessed at byscholars. All phoenixes are male and the reproduction cycle con¬sists entirely of the self-immolation. Whether this is a natural bi¬ological reproduction cycle or a magical birth is unclear.This potent priest spell enables the caster to actually summona phoenix that will come and aid him. The most stringent re¬striction to this is that the caster must be of good alignment ora druid. Evil or nondruid neutral priests cannot summon aphoenix.When cast, a phoenix will always come to aid. However,depending on how far away the nearest phoenix is, it maytake some time for it to appear. One of these powerful crea¬tures will appear in ld8 = l rounds. A modified roll of 0' indi¬cates that a phoenix will appear right away in a huge burst ofsmoke and flame.Because the caster must be good or be a druid, there is sel¬dom a conflict of interest between the phoenix and the sum¬moned However, a phoenix will never attack beings of goodalignment (unless there is an extremely good reason for it). Itwill* however, risk its own life if the cause mandates suchaction and will further the aims of good that the summonerhas undertaken.When the spell has expired, the phoenix does not disappear,but it is then free to do what it will. This may in fact be whatthe caster summoned it for, or it may leave if it feels the rea¬sons for its summoning were insufficient.The material components for this spell are three diamondsof at least 500 gp value (which are consumed by the energiesof the spell) and a red hot coal.Piercers resemble stalactites found on cave roofs. They are actu-ally a species of gastropods that, without their shells, resembleslugs with long tails, A piercer climbs onto the ceiling of a cavernand waits patiently; when it detects prey beneath it, it drops fromthe ceiling and impales the victim with the sharp end of its shell.Piercers look like limestone growths on the ceiling of a cavern,just like ordinary stalactites. They come in the following sizes:one foot long (2 Hit Die), three feet long (2 Hit Dice), four andone-hall teet long (3 Hit Dice), and six feet long (4 Hit Dice),Piercers can be identified on very dose inspection by a pair oftiny eyestaiks that curl along the side of the stalactite.Combat* Piercers have only one chance to hit: if an attack failsto score a kill, the piercer cannot attack again until it slowlyscales a wall to resume its position. Piercers can hear noises anddetect heat sources in a 120-yard radius; these heat sources in¬clude humans. If the noise and light are stationary lor many min¬utes at a time, piercers will slowly edge into attack position overthe source of the stimulus. Piercers are virtually indistinguishablefrom natural phenomena. A group of characters has a -7 modifieron its surprise roll against a piercer (this guarantees that thegroup will be surprised unless it has some positive modifiers),A piercer, after it has fallen, is slow and fairly easily skin. Itssoft underbelly has one defense mechanism; when exposed to airit covers itself in a corrosive acid which inflicts 1 point of damageon contact with flesh. This is usually enough to dissuade naturalpredators from disturbing it.Habitat-Society: While piercers are nonintelligent, the piercersin a colony are aware of each other, They often fall simultane¬ously, to feed on those killed by other piercers (which makes thearea suddenly very dangerous),Piercers dwell in caverns, where they live in groups of about 10members. They prefer to hang over high traffic areas, so theywill usually be found near cave entrances. Aside from mating,the piercers are not social creatures. There are rumored to begreat caverns deep underground that contain colonies of hun¬dreds of piercers. Piercers are not attracted to treasure, only tofood.Ecology: The piercer is a mollusk, hatched from a hen-sized eggwhich the parent lays in dutches of six to eight in isolated areasof the cavern. When they hatch, the young appear to be slugsfeeding on fungi. After several months, they climb the cavernwalls, secrete a chemical that hardens into the familiar stalactiteshape, and then wait for prey to come.A piercer has a lifespan of four years and grows one Hit Dieper year. In any group of piercers, the number of creatures withone, two, three, and four Hit Dice will be nearly evenly divided(e.g., in a group of 12 piercers, there will be three one Hit Diepiercers, three with two Hit Dice, three with three Hit Dice, andthree with four Hit Dice).A piercer can go without food for months, ft stores food in asecond stomach that can preserve food for long periods of time;some alchemists seek out piercers to extract a substance from thisorgan and refine it for human use, as it can keep foodstuffs andprecious ingredients fresh for weeks. Piercers also store large sup¬plies of water, extracted from their victims. Piercers can maintainthis water supply for months.The taste of a piercer h said to resemble that of a snail, butwith a bitter aftertaste. Their eggs and offspring are not tradedon the open market.
Of the many hazards in the wilds, these plants are among themost frightening. They feed on animals, perhaps as nature's re¬venge on animals for their habit of feeding on plants.The choke creeper, or strangler vine, is a long, thick vine withmany branch vines, each capable of attacking. The vine is olivegreen in color, and the main vine is almost 1-2 feet thick. Branchvines have flexible tendrils, allowing them to creep at 5 yards perround. They are attracted to light and heat.For each 20 feet of main vine, it has the 1 bp per HD; branchvines have 2 hp per 20 feet of the main vine (branch vine hitpoints are in addition to those of the main vine, not part of thetotal), In each 10-toot section of the main vine, there are fourbranch vines. The smallest choke creeper is 20 feet long, has lhp HD (25 hp total h and has eight branch vines, each with 2 hp.The largest choke creeper is 160 feet long, has 8 hp/HD (200 hptotalh and has 64 branch vines, each with 16 hp. The main vine isAC 6, the branches AC 5.A maximum of four branch vines can attack a single target.They appear to be normal vegetation and can usually grab unsus¬pecting victims. Victims can break tree with a successful bendbars/lift gates roll; it the roll fails, they are held fast until the vinethat holds them is severed. Seized victims suffer ld4 points ofdamage per round, with a 10% chance per round (non-cumulative) that the choke creeper achieves a strangling grip.The victim dies after one round of strangulation.A choke creeper is immune to torch fire, but takes normal damagefrom hotter fires such as those caused by burning oil: hot fires makethe vine move away. The creeper takes only 1 hp damage per die ofcold damage, but cold stuns the all plant sections struck for ld4 +1rounds. Electrical attacks do no damage; instead, they double thecreepers movement rate for ld4 + 1 rounds.This insidious relative of the much smaller Venus flytrap attractsprey by scent, entrapping and dissolving its victims in acidic se¬cretions. It is a gigantic bush with towering stalks of purple blos¬soms, and huge green leaves at ground level.During daylight hours the mantrap releases pollen continu¬ously; all creatures who approach to within 60 feet must make asuccessful saving throw vs. poison or become attracted to theodor. Those attracted proceed to the body and voluntarily climbInto one of the ld4 + i leaf traps on the plant. Once entered, aleaf trap doses, firmly entrapping the victim (no chance of es¬cape). The victim cannot be pulled free until the plant is de¬stroyed. Its acidic secretions destroy the victim quickly, inflictingdamage per round equal to the victim s AC (discounting Dexteri¬ty bonuses). Regardless of the adjusted AC, the victim takes atleast 1 point of damage per round. Items exposed to the acid mustroll a saving throw once per round against the effects; all metalitems receive a +2 bonus.The fascination with the mantrap is so strong that, once a be¬ing is enthralled, it takes 24 hours for the effect to wear off. Thefumes from burning the plant counteract the effect. Because of itspowerful attractive ability, the nectar of mantrap flowers is aningredient in a philter of love.The retch plant, or globe palm, appears to be a typical palm tree,except that each always has ld4 + 4 globe-like, coconut-sizedfruit growing at its top. Each globe is membranous, taut, andblue, violet, or lilac in color.Walking under a retch plant makes it 20% likely that one of theglobes will fall. If there is solid contact against the tree trunk(banging against it, running into it, or climbing it) ld4 +1 of thenoisome fruits plop down. Randomly choose the target attacked;they are AC 10 against this attack. When the globes strike, theyburst, and a nauseating fluid is splashed over a 5-foot radius.Those 5-*> feet from the impact have a 25% chance of beingsplashed. The sticky, foul fluid causes creatures to vomit andretch for the next three rounds. In addition to being nauseated,victims are at half normal Strength for one hour. No savingthrow is allowed against either effect of the fluid.Creatures splashed must be washed in alcohol (includingdrinkable types} or they are more likely to attract carnivores inthe area, doubling the frequency and chance for success of en¬counter checks. The odor is discernible within a 50-foot radius,and it persists for ld4 hours unless removed as above.This plant, also called foresters' bane, has a central bush withseveral greenish-white berries that are plump, smell delicious, ed¬ible, nutritious, and rich in protein. Several broad, dark green,ribbed leaves radiate out 5-7 feet from the bushy center, whichhides ld4 + 2 tough, purple, saw-like stalks with thorny projec¬tions. A healthy plant has six saw-stalks, while damaged speci¬mens have less.Creatures stepping into the radius of the low-growing ribbedleaves risk attack. The leaves snap up one or two victims; armoris ignored for this attack, though dexterity and magical bonusesto AC are counted. A victim must make a successful Strengthcheck to pull free.A creature caught by the snapper leaves is attacked by the saw-stalks, even if the victim breaks free in the same round in which itwas caught. Each saw-stalk attacks once per round for Id4 + Ipoints of damage, shredding the victim so its flesh and blood feedthe snapper-saw. Clutched prey does not receive Dexterity ad¬justments to AC though armor and magical protection applynormally.Saw-stalks are AC 4 and require ld8 +16 points of damage apiece to sever. Each snapper leaf is AC 7 and takes ld8 + 8 pointsof damage to sever. These hit points do not count toward the to¬tal of the central bush's Hit Dice. The central bush is AC 9, but itis completely protected from outside attack when the snapperleaves are up, A victim held by the snapper leaves can attack thesaw-stalks or the central bush, but only with small piercingweapons. Lost leaves and stalks grow back in 2d4 weeks unlessthe central plant is slain,Thomslingers are carnivorous, spidery, white plants with dew-covered. pale yellow' blossoms. They average about 8 feet in di¬ameter and lie very dose to the ground.Thomslingers attack living creatures by firing thorns. Eachthorn has a range of 30 feet and causes 1 point of damage. Since alarge number of thorns are shot in a spread pattern at intendedtargets, being hit by one or more thorns is automatic. Damagefrom the thorns is 2d4 to any creature within 30 feet, once perround. They have virtually inexhaustible supplies of thorns, andare found in dose clusters. Since the shower of thorns is theironly defense, thomslingers are often found in out-of-the-wayplaces, such as pits or inaccessible caves, or growing on brick andstone walls.The leaves and central stem of a thomslinger are covered witha strong adhesive sap. Those who touch it are held fast if theyhave Strength 13 or less, until they are freed or digested. Charac¬ters with Strength 13 or greater can break free in 2d4 rounds.Once a victim is caught by the dew, the thomslinger secretes di¬gestive acids, causing 1-3 hp damage per round.Thomslingers are not very flammable, but flame causes nor¬mal damage. Open flame is extinguished after one round and oilbums for only two rounds.The deep green stalks of this plant are topped by trumpet-shapedflowers of vivid orange, bright yellows, and intense red; othercolor combinations are possible, but rare.Each flower has its own function. The orange one shoots 2d4pollen-covered tendrils, each 3 feet long; any creature struckmust make a successful saving throw' vs. poison or fall into a co¬ma for Id4 hours. The plants sensitive rootlets tell the yellowblossom where to find the slumbering victim; the yellow bloombends over and shakes down a shower of sticky enzyme thatcauses 2d4 points of damage per round until washed off (damageis reduced by 1 point per flask of water; complete immersion inwater removes the sap in one round). The red blossom extendstendrils into the victim, draining body fluids at a rate of ld6points of damage per round.The yellow musk creeper is a plant that attacks humanoids,draining Intelligence and turning them into yellow musk zom¬bies. Both creeper and zombie are immune to charm , hold, i7/w-si on, sleep , and other mind-affecting attacks.The creeper is a large, light green climbing plant with leaveslike ivy, ld4 dark green buds, and 2d6 bright yellow flowers withsplashes of purple, It tan cover an area up to 20 feet square fromits single bulbous root. Damage done to the plant is disregardedunless the root is attacked, for the vine eventually grows backfrom the main root. The creeper has a sweet, entrancing odorwhile dormant.Creepers are dormant until a creature approaches within 10feet; then the nearest flowers turn toward the prey and puff mus¬ky pollen. A victim hit by the pollen must make a successful sav¬ing throw vs. spell or be entranced and walk toward the plant,resisting all those who try to prevent it. When the victim reachesthe creeper, a green bulb extends its roots into the victim s head,and reach the brain in two rounds. The victim loses ld4 points ofIntelligence per round after that.A victim reduced to 0 Intelligence or less dies instantly; a vic¬tim reduced to Intelligence 1 or 2 becomes a yellow musk zombieunder the creepers control. If the plant dies before reducing itsprey to zombie status, 1 point of Intelligence is regained per day,or a beta! spell will restore lost Intelligence instantly. If the motherplant is destroyed first, a zombie can be cured by a neutralizepoison followed by a heal spell and four weeks of complete rest.Only man-sized humanoids become yellow musk zombies; thecreeper can control one zombie for every two flowers. A zombieacquires yellow skin and a glazed look, but otherwise looks as itdid before, wearing the same clothes and armor and wielding anyweapon it had held at the time of its conversion. It has the samehit points as before, but attacks as a 2 HD monster. It can cast nospells, nor receive bonuses for high ability scores. The zombiecan move up to 100 feet from the creeper. Yellow musk zombiesare not true undead and cannot be turned. A zombie serves thecreeper for about two months before moving off at least 200 feetand dying; the seedling that has been growing in its head quicklysprouts, flowers, and becomes a new creeper.KelpieTemperateor tropicalsaltwaterVery rareSolitaryLike other breeds of dangerous plants, these are not at all de¬fenseless, Some are the unnatural results of arcane influences,while others may Have evolved naturally.This tree is named for its noose-like vines. Hangman trees aredeciduous, resembling thick oaks with few branches and sparsefoliage. Knot-like sensory organs are usually located high on thetrunk. In the area where the tree s main branches split off, there isan opening which leads to the creature's acid-filled "stomach,'The lower trunk has a slash-like opening for the expulsion of in-digestibles. Saplings can move at 6 feet an hour, while older treescan move only 2 feet an hour.Their shallow root systems and small number of leaves requirethem to supplement their diet by direct ingestion of protein, soeach tree traps prey. During freezing weather, a taproot is putdown and the tree is dormant,A hangman tree can release a hallucinatory perfume at will,and it does so when prey is 30-80 feet away. Those who inhale theperfume believe the hangman tree to be a normal tree, or even atreant, depending on the mood of the tree. Mature and olderhangman trees can speak halting Common.The tree attacks by dropping noose-like vines around prey. Al¬though each tree has ld4+5 appendages, it can control onlythree of them at any one time. It takes IdS +12 points of damageto sever a vine; this is in addition to the damage needed to kill thetree. Vines are AC 5. while the main tree is AC 3. When in con¬tact with a victim, the tree inflicts 1-3 points of damage per roundas the vine tightens and lifts its prey {l,Q0€-pound limit) to theopening in the upper trunk. This requires four rounds. One at¬tempt at a bend bars/lift gates roll can be made to break free:victims who fail the roll cannot escape. On the fifth round afterbeing picked up, the victim is dropped into the hangman treesstomach. The victim suffers 3d4 points of acid damage per rounduntil dead, and is then digested. Escape from the stomach is im¬possible, Many sharp growths surround the top of the opening,they point inward and down. About three man-sized victims canfit in the tree's stomach at one time.A hangman tree draws power from its environment. It has 5 %resistance to magic per decade of age, up to a maximum of 95%,However, the tree is vulnerable to elemental attacks. Lightningthat passes its magic resistance inflicts double damage; extremecold shocks the tree into dormancy until it thaws. Darkness alsocauses it to slow its activities, so it functions at half efficiency(three attacks per two rounds!.Hangman trees have no interest in treasure and, because theymove constantly, it is unlikely that treasure would be found nearone, although they do expel undigestible items periodically*Age guide: 0-4 years, non-combatant sprout. 1 hp HD, no at¬tacks; $-20 years, sapling, 2-3 hp/HD; 21-75 years, mature tree.4-5 hp/HD; 76-150 years, old tree, 6-7 hp/HD; 151+ years, an¬cient tree, 8 hp/HD.The kelpie is a mass of animate seaweed, able to alter its form toresemble a green-clad woman, a hippocampus, or a green horse,it lives to drown the foolish,, and can communicate telepathical-ly with those in its embrace.When a humanoid male approaches, the kelpie reshapes lo ap¬pear as a woman or a mount; its imitation is a grotesque mock¬ery, 95% detectable in daylight. Once per day however, thekelpie can cast a charm on a humanoid male, who suffers a —2penalty to his saving throw. If he tails to save, he perceives thekelpie as a desirable woman or mount, leaps into the water, andswims on to possess the kelpie. The kelpie wraps itself around thecharmed victim, who happily drowns, taking 2dl0 points ofdamage per round until he surfaces for air, is protected fromdrowning, or dies The kelpie takes the body back to her lair todevour.Victims who can breathe water or who otherwise do notdrown, happily entwine themselves in the kelpies embrace,which confuses her. though she may welcome the victim s contin¬ued activity,A kelpie in the form of a woman or horse can travel onto landfor 1-3 hours. She tries to charm a victim to protect her until shereturns to the water He will do anything he can to protect hisbeloved kelpie, though he may be enraged by his companions'perceived treachery. The effect of this charm ends, only if the kel¬pie dies, freeing any victims still alive.Kelpies maintain body temperature equal to that of their sur¬roundings. Due to their water-drenched forms, they take onlyhalf damage from fire (none if a saving throw is made).There are various legends about the creations of kelpies. Theyare said to have been created by a sea god to punish sailors, in atime before women were sailors; or created by a female elementalprincess of water, Olhydra. who made those of her own genderimmune to kelpies 4 powers.Kelpies reproduce by increasing in size to 7 feet , then breakinginto two or four smaller kelpies. They can do this once a month,if victims are plentiful and the local fish do not feed on them toomuch,Obliviax, or memory moss, is an evil black moss with the abilityto steal memories, even memorized spells.lt grows in smallpatches and must have sunlight to spur reproduction by spores,though it needs no light for growth, it prefers a balance of wetand dry, and cannot abide cold temperatures.The moss senses intelligent creatures within 60 feet; It choosesone, preferring wizards, then other spellcasters. This victim mustmake a saving throw vs. spells or lose all memory of the last 24hours. The obliviax continues to attack once per round until itsucceeds and then makes no more attacks for 24 hours. If an obli¬viax with stolen memories is attacked, it forms part of itself into atiny moss imitation of the creature whose memories it stole. Thismossling remains attached to the parent moss and defends it bycasting stolen spells.To regain stolen memories, a victim must eat the living obli¬viax, which takes one round, if a saving throw vs, poison is suc¬cessful, the eater regains all stolen memories and spells; it thesaving throw fails, the eater becomes very ill for 3d6 turns. Extramemories and spells can be gained by eating obliviax which hasfed on someone else recently, Spells can be used by the eater, butall such memories fade within a day.A potion of forget fulness can be distilled from obliviax, and itsspores can be used to make an elixir to restore the memories ofthe forgetful or senile.Also called the spy tree, this plant appears to bean oak, althoughdose examination reveals that it has a visage and sensory organsthat resemble a distorted human face. It is 90% unlikely that the"face' Is noticed unless the observer is within 10 feet of the quick-wood, The creature has excellent senses, with 120-foot infra-vision and the ability to detect vibrations through its roots, andaerial movements through its leaves.The quickwood seldom moves, but it sends its roots up to 90feet, through loose topsoil, to seize and hold immobile any crea¬ture weighing under 1,000 pounds. Roots cause no damage. Theyare too strong to be broken and take no damage from blunt weap¬ons, and only 1 point of damage from piercing weapons. Edgedweapons can sever roots, which are treated as large creatures with10 hp each; damage inflicted to the roots does not count towardthe tree's total. The quickwood will allow up to six of its roots to besevered before it withdrawn the other ld6+6 to safety. The rootspull prey to the quickwoods mouth, which can damp down tocause 3d4 points of damage to anything touching it.The quickwood can perspire and drench itself, so it is immuneto fire; it is immune to lightning, poisons, and gasses. It is alsoimmune to most other spells which do not affect plants specifi¬cally, including all mind-affecting spells. If attacked by a spell,the quickwood absorbs some or all of the spells energy, and usesit to radiate fear in a radius of 10 feet per spell level absorbed.The spellcaster must make a saving throw vs, spells; if the savefails, all the spell s energy is siphoned into ihe fear effect, Other¬wise, the spell has normal effects, and fmr is simply a side effect.The quickwood can control up to 2d4 normal oaks within onemile, using them to gather information.Although it gathers no treasure. It may be charmed or other¬wise convinced to guard treasure, which may be placed In thequickwood s trunk. If acting as a guardian tor some other being,a quickwood can make a hollow drumming sound which can beheard for a mile or more.Shambling mounds, or shamblers, appear to be heaps of rottingvegetation. They are actually an intelligent form of plant life,with a roughly humanoid shape, and a brain-like control centerin its "chest ' area. A shambler has a 6-foot girth on its lower half,tapering to about 2 feet at its 'head.”Shambling mounds are found only in regions of dense rainfalland vegetation. Dismal swamps, marshes, and rain forests aretheir favorite living areas, but some wet. subterranean places al¬so serve as shambler lairs. They are solitary beasts, rarely livingin the same area with other sham biers—usually only In areas
where the food source is constant, near famous ruins, or aban¬doned gold mines.Shamblers are almost totally silent and invisible in their natu¬ral surroundings; opponents suffer a -3 penalty to surprise rolls,A shambler often lies in a shallow bog, waiting for some creatureto walk onto it, then it attacks. The creatures are excellent swim¬mers as well, and they have been known to sneak into the campsof unsuspecting travelers at night.A shambling mound attacks with huge, arm-like appendages;a victim hit by both arms in the same round is entangled in thecreatures slimy vines and rotting vegetable matter. Entangledcreatures suffocate in the slime in 2d4 rounds unless the shambleris killed, or the victim breaks free with a successful bend bars/liftgates roll.Because of the vegetation which covers its critical inner body,the shambling mound is immune to blunt weapons, and takes on¬ly half damage from piercing and slashing weapons. The creatureis immune to fire, and takes half or no damage from cold, de¬pending on whether it makes its saving throw. Lightning actuallycauses a shambler to grow, adding l-foot to its height, as well as1 HD and appropriate hit points, for each lightning-based attackused against it,Because of the location of its brain, the shambler cannot bekilled by lopping off its head or limbs. The remaining vines alongthe torso join together to form a new extremity within oneround. Only when enough of the shambling mound has beenhacked awray, will it finally die. A wounded shambler need onlyrest in a damp clump of foliage to heal; it rises again in 12 hours,fully healed, and probably angry.Since shamblers gain power from electrical attacks, there arerumors of shambling mounds with 20 or more Hit Dice. Sincethey often live in the same areas as will-o'-wisps, there may betruth to such rumors, and giant shamblers may inhabit deep,dark swamps and jungles.Strangleweed is an intelligent kelp found in relatively warm seawater. A bed of these carnivorous plants are indistinguishablefrom normal seaweed. A strangleweed patch will cover an ovalarea of 3d4 square feet, on the sea's surface; 3d4 fronds of vary¬ing lengths Qd6 + P teef» hanging downward from the patch*Any creature near enough is attacked, a hit indicating that thefrond has entwined about its victim. Any victim entwined suffersa -2 penalty to attack rolls. Each frond has 4d4 Strength points,and the other fronds add their Strength to the total. A victimcompares Strength with the strangleweed; Strengths of 18/51 tolS/00 are rounded up to 19. If the victim is stronger, each pointof difference in Strength gives a 10% chance of escape, which canbe attempted each round.If the frond is stronger than the victim, the victim cannot es¬cape alone and the fronds crush the victim for 1 point of dam¬age, per point of Strength difference. If the two are of equalStrength, the victim cannot escape, but takes no damage.A giant sundew appears to be a 3- to 4 foot-mound of grayishgreen, tarry ropes or rags. The air around one is fly infested andholds a thick odor like sweet syrup. Preferring shaded places inwhich to grow r , the sundew has only hair-like roots that anchor itlightly in place. It can pull itself slowly along the ground usingsticky tendrils. Due to the plant’s sticky exterior, missiles andfire-based attacks inflict only half damage.The sundew detects moving creatures by vibrations. Whenanything moves within 5 feet of it, it lashes out with its tendrils.Its body is covered with hundreds of tendrils, and a maximum ofsix can attack each creature in range, each round. The tendrilsexude sticky globs of sap. For every three tendrils that attach to avictim, the victim suffers a — 1 penalty to attack rolls. The sapcontains a mild enzyme that inflicts 1 point of damage per roundfor each tendril striking the victim, regardless of whether or notthe tendril is still attached, A successful open doors roll breaks atendril; each tendril must be checked separately, up to once pertendril per round.if a sundew's attack roll is an unmodified 20, it has struck thevictim's mouth and nose, clogging them with sap; suffocation oc¬curs in ld3 +1 rounds unless the sap is removed. The sap may bedissolved by vinegar or alcohol.Thomies are dog-like plant creatures trained as guards by moldmen. They are covered by a spiky bark. A thorny attacks firstwith its bite; if the bite hits, the creature tries to roll its bodyagainst its victim, causing 3d4 points of damage with a successfulhit. Thomies reproduce by laying egg-like seeds in the ground. Asmall tree sprouts from the seed, eventually producing budswhich grow into small thornies, Thomies can be trained if raisedfrom buds.
Poltergeists are the spirits of restless dead. They are similar tohaunts but are more malevolent. They hate living things and tor¬ment them constantly by breaking furniture, throwing heavyobjects, and making haunting noises. They are often, but not al¬ways, attached to a particular area.Poltergeists are always invisible. Those who can see invisibleobjects describe them as humans whose features have been twist¬ed at the sight of horrors. They wear rags and are covered withchains and other heavy objects that represent a multitude of evildeeds that these creatures have committed against themselves aswell as others.Combat; A poltergeist attacks by throwing a heavy object —any nearby object that a strong human can throw will suffice. Ithas the same chance to hit as a 5-HD monster (hence its adjustedTHACO in the statistics given above). If the victim is struck hesuffers no damage (treat the use of deadly weapons such asknives and swords as terrifying near misses), but he must roll asuccessful saving throw vs, spell or flee in terror in a random di¬rection (choose available exits away from the poltergeist and de¬termine randomly) for 2dl2 rounds before recovering. There is a50% chance that the victim drops whatever he was holding (hedrops it at the start of his flight). Once a person rolls a successfulsaving throw, he is immune to further fear attempts by the pol¬tergeist in that area.Those who try to hit a poltergeist but cannot detect invisibleobjects suffer a -4 penalty to their attack roll. A poltergeist isharmed only by silver or magical weapons. Sprinkled holy wateror a strongly presented holy symbol drives back a poltergeist butcannot harm it. Poltergeists that are bonded to the area of theirdeath are hard to dispel: these are treated as if they were ghoulson the Turning Undead table. Wandering poltergeists may beturned or destroyed by a priest as if they were skeletons.Habitat-Society: Some say that poltergeists are the spirits ofthose who committed heinous crimes that went unpunished inlife. Whatever their origins, poltergeists are malevolent spiritswhose activities can be anything from annoying to deadly Theirpurpose in existence is to haunt and disrupt the lives of those whostill live.Poltergeists often haunt families and partnerships. In the lattercase, they haunt their place of business, striking almost as muchterror in death as they did in life.A poltergeist is often strongly bonded to a particular place, theplace where its corporeal existence ended. Bonded poltergeists al¬most never wander more than 100 feet from this place. A few arewandering spirits, doomed never to find their way home. Bondedspirits are stronger than wandering spirits (wanderers never havemore than 3 hit points).Places where poltergeists are particularly strong have beenknown to have phantom shifts , These extremely rare and terrify¬ing illusions take the character encountering the poltergeist backin time, to the time when the poltergeist was still alive. They of¬ten reveal why the being was transformed into a poltergeist.Characters in a phantom shift may interact freely with the illu¬sion, but any attempt to harm the illusion shatters it and returnsthe characters to the present time; likewise, any attempt on thepart of the illusion to attack the characters also shatters the illu¬sion without any harm being done. The illusion may continue atdifferent times, or may repeat itself endlessly. No one can predictexactly when a place will experience a phantom shift, but theyseem to occur on the anniversary of the poltergeist s death.Ecology: These spirits, which are terrifying and pitiable at thesame time, do not consume food and do not collect treasure. Pol¬tergeists dissolve when slain or laid to rest.
Puddings are voracious, puddm&like monsters composed ot groupsof cell colonies that scavenge and hunt for food. They typically in¬habit ruins and dungeons. They have the ability to sense heat andanalyze material structure from a distance of up to 90 teet to deter¬mine if something is edible. Deadly puddings attack any animals (in¬cluding humans! or vegetable matter on sight.All deadly puddings are immune to arid, cold, and poison. Light¬ning bolts and blows from weapons divide them into smaller puddings,each able to attack exactly as the original pudding. Fire causes normaldamage, as do wagfc missiles. Puddings can ooze through cracks thatare at least i inch wide and can travel on ceilings and walls (falling onvictims as a nasty surprise! at the same speed as on a level surfacePuddings reproduce by fission. They are adapted to live in a widevariety of climates.Puddings starting with 11-30% of maximum possible hil points are3 feet to 4 feet in diameter; with 31-50% of full hit points, 5 feel wide;with 51-70% of full hit points, 6 teet wide; with 71-90% of full hitpoints, 7 feet wide: and with 91-100% of full hit points, 8 feet wide, Ifa pudding is split up so it becomes less than 3 feet wide, it becomesthinner but retains its 3-foot diameter. Because puddings do not useall of their mouth openings (which cover their exposed surfaces!, thesmallest pudding does the same damage as the largest.Black pudding acid is highly corrosive, inflicting 3-24 points of dam¬age per round to organic matter and dissolving a 2-inch thickness ofwood equal to its diameter in one round, Black puddings also dis¬solve metal. Chain mail dissolves in one round, plate mail in two;each magical 'plus ' increases the time it takes to dissolve the metal byone round (thus plate mail +3 takes two rounds to dissolve for beingplate mail, plus three rounds for having a +3 magical bonus, for atotal of five rounds}These cold-loving creatures are 50% likely to be mistaken for ice andsnow iguaranteeing surprise} even under the best of conditions. Whitepuddings haunt polar regions or icy places in order to find prey, al¬though they can live by devouring any animal or vegetable matter;even ice provides them with enough nutrition to exist. White puddingscannot affect metals but dissolve animal and vegetable materials in asingle round, inflicting damage to flesh at an astonishing rate.Adapted to dwell in and regions, these monsters scavenge barrensand deserts and teed on silicates (sand) if animal and vegetable matteris unavailable. They dissolve leather in a single round, regardless otmagical pluses* Metals are eaten at a rate half that of black puddings;chain takes two rounds to dissolve, plate four rounds, with an addi¬tional two rounds per magical plusThis type dwells principally in marsh areas. It has a tough skin but itsattack is less dangerous than other types of puddings. Brown pud¬dings cannot affect metals but dissolve leather and wood in a singleround, regardless of magical pluses.Other pudding types are possible, at the DM's option.
1-4/1-4 or by weaponBerserk rageImmune to poisonNilQuaggoths are humanoids with long, shaggy-, white hair coveringtheir entire bodies. They wear no clothing. Warlike and vicious,they roam the Underdark looking for prey. Drow sometimes en¬slave them as guards and spider handlers.Quaggoths speak a halting form of Undercommon, and cangrasp only simple concepts. More intelligent quaggoths may alsospeak a few words of Duergar, Drow, or Common,These aggressive beasts have infra vision with a range of 120'*They are immune to all poisons.Combat: Quaggoth tribes claim a certain territory as theirs andpatrol it, hunting for food. Any detected animals or creatures(such as a party of adventurers! invite certain attack,Most tribes (70%) of quaggoths do not carry weapons, andattack with their daws for 1-4 hit points of damage per hit. Theremainder of quaggoth tribes carry stone dubs or axes. Thosequaggoths which are or have been drow slaves carry superiorweapons, such as steel battle axes or two-handed swords.If a quaggoth is reduced to 25% or less of its original hit points,it enters a berserk fun 1 2 3 and receives a +2 bonus to its attack anddamage rolls. This rage lasts until the quaggoth dies or all ene¬mies are dead or out of sight.For every 12 quaggoths encountered there will be a leader, orjald. The jald has 3 + 3 Hit Dice and wears leather or skins, mak¬ing it AC 5. In addition, it gains a +1 bonus to damage rolls.Jalds direct combat; if no jald is present, the quaggoths will fallupon their prey, whatever it is, in an unorganized mannerAny quaggoth tribe has a 20% chance of having one or twothonots. A thonot is the quaggoth equivalent of a shaman. In¬stead of magic, however, thonots use psionics. A thonot will useits abilities to aid the tribe in combat, escape, or healing.If quaggoths win combat, they take all bodies, including thoseof dead quaggoths, to their lair and devour them.• Psychokinesis - Sciences: telekinesis. Devotions: controlflames, molecular agitation.% Psycho metabolism - Sciences: shadow-form. Devotions:cell adjustment, expansion, reduction,Habitat Society: Quaggoths are nomadic hunters. They changeterritories periodically. In each new territory, they claim a centralcave as a lair, leaving treasure with a few guards. The rest of thetribe hunts, returning periodically to rest and change guards.Females are equal to males in numbers and abilities in a quag¬goth tribe. For every adult quaggoth, there will be one young.Half of these young are unable to attack or defend; the other halfhave 1+1 HD and the same AC and attacks as adults,Thonots control what passes for religious life among quag¬goths. They oversee what few rituals there are; those ritualswhich are known include the daily preparation for hunting, com¬ing of age, and death (a brief whistling to send the spirit awaybefore the rest of the quaggoths eat the body).Quaggoths can mate at any time of the year. They are notknown to have any courtship or mating rituals. Young are bomabout 10 months after mating. Births are usually singular, buttwins are not uncommon.The origin of quaggoths is unknown* Some sages claim thatthey were once a semi-civilized race which dominated much ofthe Underdark through conquest and ritual sacrifice, until thedrow, duergar, and other races broke their power. Others specu¬late they had some sort of civilization on the surface and weredriven underground; this theory is supported by the quaggothshatred for surface-dwelling dwarves and elves,Ecology: Quaggoths produce a few artifacts, mostly crudelycarved stone items. A few seem to be talented at making neck¬laces with wooden, bone, or stone beadsQuaggoths fear no creature. Though they are dangeroushunters, they are just as often prey for other predators of theUnderdark, Quaggoths can be trained as servants and guards ifcaptured early.Tropical or sub¬tropical forest,jungle, or srwampRareTropica] or sub¬tropical forest,jungle, or swampVery rareRakshasas are a race of malevolent spirits encased in flesh thathunt and torment humanity. No one knows where these creaturesoriginate; some say they are the embodiment of nightmares.Raksha&as stand 6 to 7 feel tall and weigh between 250 and 300pounds. They have no uniform appearance but appear as hu¬manoid creatures with the bodily features of various beasts (mostcommonly tigers and apes). Hands whose palms curve back¬ward, away from the body seem to be common. Rakshasas ofthe highest standing sometimes have several heads. All rakshasaswear human clothing of the highest qualityCombat: Rakshasas savor fresh human meat and use illusionsto get it They have a limited form of ESP which allows them todisguise themselves as someone the victim trusts; the rakshasauses this illusion as a lure and strikes when the victim is mostunprepared. The rakshasa must drop the illusion when it attacks.Normally rakshasas can have magical abilities, up to the follow¬ing limits: four 1st level wizard spells, three 2nd level wizardspells, two 3rd level wizard spells, and three 1st level priestspells. These are cast at 7th level ability, Rakshasas are immuneto all spells lower than 8th level. An attacker needs at least a +1magical weapon to harm a rakshasa; any weapon below +3 in¬flicts only half damage, However, a hit by any blessed crossbowbolt kills a rakshasa instantly.Habitat Society: Rakshasa society is bound by rigid castes.Each rakshasa is bom into a particular role in life and cannotadvance. Females (known as rakshasi) are fit to be consorts, hon¬ored only by their faithfulness and the fighting ability of theirchildren. There are 1-3 females per male.Rakshasa society is led by a rajah or maharajah, whose com¬mands are to be obeyed without question.Rakshasas wage war on humanity constantly not only to feedthemselves but because they believe that battle is the only way togain honor. If confronted by humans who recognize their trueappearance, they arc insufferably arrogant.A rakshasa s life varies in cycles of wild self-indulgence in times ofprosperity and strict fasting and sacrifice in Limes ot trouble or be¬fore battle, They are honorable creatures but will twist the wordingof an agreement to suit their purposes. They prefer to deal with hu¬manity by using their illusion powers to deceive and manipulatethem, but are brave and forthright in battle.Ecology: As spirits, rakshasas are virtually immortal. Theyproduce a new generation every century to replace the rakshasasthat have been slain in battle. No creatures prey on rakshasasexcept those who would avenge their victims* Rakshasa essencecan be an ingredient in a potion of delusionAbout 15% of all rakshasas are greater rakashasas or ruhks,(JbugftfeJ. These warriors are the guardians of a rakshasa com¬munity. They are hit only by magical weapons of +2 or better;any weapon below +4 inflicts only hall damage against them.Their spells are cast at 9th level of ability.About 15% of all rakshasa ruhks are rakshasa rajahs, or lords.Each rajah is the leader (patriarch) of his local clan. These rulersof rakshasadom have the same abilities as a ruhk, but also havethe spell casting abilities of both a 6th level priest and an 8th levelwizard, cast at 11th level of ability.About 5% of all rakshasa rajahs are rakshasa maharajahs, or dukes.Maharajahs have the same abilities as a ruhk, but have 13 + 39 HitDice, and the spell casting abilities of a I3th level wizard and 9thlevel priest. A maharajah is the leader of either several small, relatedclans, or a single powerful dan. Maharajahs reside on the outerplanes, where they rule island communities of hundreds of raksha¬sas, and serve as minions to even greater powers.
omnivorous, and adaptable, and they often carry diseases. Statisticsin italics above refer to the giant rat. Stats without an italicized entryapply to both varieties.The black rat is about 8 inches long, with a tail at least that long, alean body, pointed nose, and long ears The “'black" rat is dark graywith brownish patches, and a gray or white belly. It is a good climber(dimb 3) and jumper, but cannot swim.The brown rat, also known as the sewer rat or the wharf rat, is 5-10 inches long, and its tall is shorter than the black rat s. Its eyes andears are also smaller, but it has a larger, latter body. Brown rats maybe gray white, black, or piebald in color. They cannot dimb, but areexcellent swimmers (swim 3) and bum>wers. If rats infest a building,black rats inhabit the upper floors, and brown rats occupy the lowerfloor and the cellars.Combat: Rats normally flee anything bigger than themselves, but atrapped rat will do anything to survive and a pack of starving ratswill attack anything in order to feed. Rats attack with their sharpfront teeth and often carry diseases, so that a rat bite has a 5% chanceof infecting its victim with a serious disease unless the victim makes asuccessful saving throw vs. poison. Normal rats fear fire, but brave itwhen very hungry.A swarm of rats can be treated as a single monster having an as¬signed number of Hit Dice and automatically causing damage eachround to small creatures in the swarm s area. A typical pack mightcover a ID- * 10-foot area, have 4 HD, and inflict 4 points of damageper round. Weapons have little effect on a pack, but area effect spellsand some other attacks (such as flaming oil) are effective. When thepack has lost its hit points, it is considered dispersed and unable toinflict mass damage.Habitat Society: The chief purpose of rats is to find food. Packs oftenburrow into and eat food stores. Rats nest almost anywhere, chewingdoth, paper, or wood to make a nest.Ecology: Rats are very prolific, breeding three to five times a year.Brown rats produce 2d4 + 6 young per litter, while a black rat littercontains oniy 5-6 young. Both types of rats are omnivorous. Brownrats are considered to be more aggressive than black rats. Their teethare extremely powerful; they have been known to gnaw holes in leadpipes. Rats have a lifespan of two to four years.Brush rats (also known as trade rats and pack rats) belong to a muchless aggressive family of rats known as wood rats. They are slate grayabove and white on their underbellies. They are nearly the size ofbrown rats. Brash rats build nests or burrows in forested areas. Theyare attracted to small, shiny objects and sometimes steal them andcarry' them to their hoard. Pack rats are herbivores and will not at¬tack humans. They do not carry diseases. Brush rats can be trained.These vile beasts plague underground areas such as crypts anddungeons. Their burrows honeycomb many graveyards, where theycheat ghouls of their prizes by tunneling to newly interred corpses.Giant rats are brown/black in color with white underbellies, and arerelated to the brown rat, with fatter bodies and shorter tails. As withnormal rats, any creature bitten by a giant rat has a 5% chance perwound of catching a debilitating disease; a successful saving throwvs, poison prevents catching the disease. Giant rats avoid attackingstrong parties unless driven by hunger or commanded by creaturessuch as vampires and wererats. Giant rats are tearful of fire and fleefrom it except if driven by hunger or magic. They are excellent swim¬mers and can attack in water as well as on land,The osquip is a multi-legged rodent the size of a small dog. It is hair¬less, with a huge head and large teeth. Most have six legs, but some(25%) have eight, and a few (5%) have 10. The creatures' leatheryhides are pale yellow in color,Osquips build small, carefully hidden tunnels, and their teeth aresharp enough to dig through stone. If someone enters an area inwhich there are osquip tunnels, the creatures can emerge quickly andopponents receive a -5 to surprise rolls. The osquip are territorialand attack fearlessly and ferociously. Osquips are not afraid of fire,but are poor swimmers {50% drown, 50% paddle with a movementrate of 1).Osquips are difficult to domesticate, but jermlaine and a few wiz¬ards have succeeded by giving the creatures gems, for they collectshiny objects. Gsquip leather is soft and water-resistant, and theirteeth can be used in digging magic.
Remorhaz, sometimes known as polar worms T inhabit only chillarctic wastes. They are very aggressive predators that devourany animal matter, including humans, demihumans, and human-oids: they have even been known to attack frost giants.A remorhaz has a segmented body with a winged head andneck, standing on dozens of chitinous legs, Remorhaz have an iceblue color everywhere except on their backs, where a streak ofwhite sets off the many protrusions located there. The size of aremorhaz is determined by its Hit Dice: a 7 Hit Dice remorhaz is21 feet long, an S Hit Dice creature is 24 feet long, etc. Their lan¬guage consists of roaring, bellowing, and howling.Combat: In combat the remorhaz beats its small wings, raisingup the front quarter of its body. It then snaps itself forward, strik¬ing with blinding speed. They are able to swallow prey whole onan unmodified attack roll of 20; any victim swallowed is killedinstantly by the intense heat inside the creature. When aroused,the remorhaz secretes a substance that causes its intestines to be¬come very hot and its back protrusions actually glow cherry redfrom excess heat. Any nonmagical weapon melts from contactwith its back and any creature touched by these surfaces suffers10-100 points of damage.To determine where a blow has struck a remorhaz. considerwhere the attacker is in respect to the remorhaz. While the re¬morhaz is rearing to attack, a blow from the front hits the rela¬tively soft underbelly. When the remorhaz is attacking acreature, any blow inflicted hits the head unless the underside isspecifically stated as the object of the attack, In all other cases,the body is the object of the attack, subject to adjudication by theDM.Remorhaz are slower than most polar dwellers, so they preferto burrow into the snow and surface when they hear prey nearbyhoping to achieve surprise. Remorhaz have Infra vision to 60 feet.Habitat Society: A remorhaz lair usually consists of a numberof large, smoothly rounded tunnels in ice and snow or rock,gradually descending to a large central chamber. Tunnels in iceand snow will be very slippery, as the remorhazs hot back re¬peatedly melts the snow, leaving it to refreeze. The central cham¬ber is only about twice the size of a remorhaz, while the centralchamber of a nesting pair is about four times their size and maycontain icy stalactites,Remorhaz have a hunting range of 60 miles. Except where thegame has been hunted to extinction, these creatures tolerate thepresence of other remorhaz in their hunting grounds.Ecology: Remorhaz are carnivores, sustaining themselves witha diet of deer, elk, and even polar bears. They mate in late sum¬mer and stay together for two months before departing to livesolitary existences. Remorhaz mate every year but can produceoffspring only three or four times in a lifetime; the female lays aclutch of one or two grey-blue eggs, remaining with the eggs at alltimes, coiling around them to keep them warm; if the eggs are leftin the freezing cold for only one minute, they will never hatch.Young remorhaz have 1 Hit Die at birth and grow to 7 Hit Diceafter four months, when they leave the nest . Immature remorhazhave weaker armor (+2 AC in all locations); 1-3 Hit Dice re¬morhaz can only bite for 2-12 points of damage, while 4-6 HitDice creatures inflict 3-18 points of damage. From birth, theyoung remorhaz have all the powers of an adult,Remorhaz have lifespans of 30 years. Their eggs are valued at500 gold pieces and are eagerly sought because these creaturescan be trained to be excellent guards. However, a remorhaz canbe trained to obey only one or two masters, and will attack itsmaster if hungry enough. The heat secretion of a rhemorhaz,thrym, is valuable as a component for heat-related magical itemsand can be sold to alchemists for 5-10 gold pieces per flask. Theremorhaz will contain 10 flasks worth of thrym per Hit Die,
ParalyzationSee belowSee belowM (5 J -6'JSee below3,000Revenants are vengeful spirits that have risen from the grave todestroy their killers.The revenant appears as a spectral, decayed version of its ap¬pearance at the time of its death. Its pallid skin is drawn tightlyover its bones. The flesh is cold and clammy. The sunken eyes aredull and heavy-lidded but, when the revenant faces his intendedvictim, the eyes blaze with unnatural intensity. The revenantbears an aura of sadness, anger, and determination.Combat; A revenant attacks by hooking its daw-like handsaround its victim's throat. This strangulation causes 2dS points ofdamage each round. It will not release its grip until either the re¬venant is destroyed or its victim is dead. It never uses weapons.If the revenant stares into its victim s eyes, that person mustroll a successful saving throw vs. spell or be paralyzed with ter¬ror for 2d4 rounds, This power affects only the revenant's killer.If a revenant is dismembered, the severed parts act indepen¬dently, as though guided by the revenant's mind. The revenaniswillpower causes the parts to reunite. It can also regenerate 3 hitpoints of damage each round, except for fire damage. It is im¬mune to acid and gas. Although a revenant's body can be cutapart by normal or magical weapons, the damage is temporaryand does not destroy the revenant. Only burning destroys arevenant—the original body must be completely consumed andreduced to ash.Although it is undead, the revenant is motivated entirely byself-will. Therefore, as it ts not inherently evil, it is not affectedby holy water, holy/unholy symbols, or other religious para¬phernalia. It cannot be turned by priests nor can it he raised orresurrected.Habitat Society: Under exceptional circumstances, a characterwho has died a violent death may rise as a revenant from thegrave to wreak vengeance on his killer(s). In order to make thistransition, two requirements must be met. The dead character'sConstitution must be 13 and either his Wisdom or Intelligencemust be greater than 16. Also, the total of his six ability scoresmust be 90 or more. Even if these conditions are met, there isonly a 5% chance that the dead character becomes a revenant.If both Intelligence and Wisdom are over 16, the chance in¬creases to 10%. If Intelligence, Wisdom, and Constitution are allIS, the creature can shift at will into any freshly killed humanoid,if the revenant rolls a successful saving throw vs. death.If the character died a particularly violent death, it may be un¬able to reoccupy its original body. In this case, the spirit occupiesany available, freshiy-dead corpse. However, the revenantskiller and associates always see the revenant as the person theykilled*The revenant retains all the abilities it possessed in its previouslife and has at least the hit points and saving throws of an S-HitDie creature. Its alignment is neutral, regardless ot its alignmentin life. It can converse fluently in its original language, althoughthe stiffness of its vocal cords deters it from speaking except un¬der extreme circumstances, such as when casting a spell at itskiller.The sole purpose of the revenant's brief existence is to wreakvengeance on Its killer, together with anyone who may have aid¬ed in the murder. It stops at nothing to achieve its purpose andcan locate its intended victim wherever he may be. Accomplicesare also tracked down if they are in the company of the killer, butif they are elsewhere they are ignored until the killer is dealt with,If the associates of the killer are with him in a party, they are dealtwith after the killer is dead.The revenant's body does decay, though at a slower rate thannormal. Within three to six months, the corpse decomposes rap¬idly and the revenants spirit returns to the plane from which itcame. When the revenant has completed its mission, the bodyimmediately disintegrates and its spirit finally rests in peace.A revenant does not attack innocents except In self-defense. Ifnecessary, the revenant can use cunning to get to its prey.Ecology: Revenants give murder victims a chance to avengetheir own murders, They pursue their goals alone without desireor need for allies. However, if the revenant faces a powerful foeable to destroy the revenant s new form, the revenant may decideto use adventurers as pawns in its quest.
Looking almost too big to be real, rocs are huge birds of prey thatdwell in warm mountainous regions and are known for carryingoff large animals (cattle, horses, elephants) for food.Rocs resemble large eagles, with either dark brown plumage orall golden feathers from head to tail. In a few rare instances, rocsof all red, black or white are sighted, but such sightings are oftenconsidered bad omens. These giant birds are 60 feet long frombeak to tail feathers, with wingspans as wide as 120 feet.Combat: The roc swoops down upon prey seizes it in powerfultalons, and carries it off to the rocs lair to be devoured at leisure.The resulting damage is 3d6 per claw. Most of the time (95%), aroc carries off its prey only if both claws hit. If the prey was hitby only one claw r the roc usually lets go, then turns around andattempts another grab. Once the prey has been secured, the rocflies back to its nest. If the creature resists, the roc strikes with itsbeak, inflicting 4d6 points of damage per hit.Should a human, humanoid, or demihuman be captured,there is a 65% chance that the victim s arms are both pinned tohis sides, making impossible melee weapon attacks or spellcast¬ing that requires hand gestures. A roc will let go of its prey if itsuffers damage equal to a quarter of its hit points. A roc canpick up two targets simultaneously if they are within 10 feet ofeach other.A roc usually cruises at a height of about 300 feet, seeking outlikely prey with its sharp eyes. When a good target is found, itswoops down silently. The stealth of this first attack imposes a -5penalty to its opponents" surprise rolls.Habitat Society: Roc lairs are vast nests made of t rees, branch¬es, and the like. They inhabit the highest mountains in warm re¬gions, Rocs are not given to nesting dose to each other, with anest rarely being located within 20 miles of another nest. There isa 15% chance of finding ld4 +1 eggs in a roc nest. These eggs sellfor 2d6 x 100 gp to merchants specializing in exotic items. As maybe expected, rocs fight to the death to protect these nests andtheir contents, gaining a +1 bonus to their attack roll.The treasure of a roc is usually strewn about and below thenest for the creature does not value such. It is the residue from itsvictims, Tf the roc has been seizing pack horses and mules, someof that treasure may be merchant s w-ares such as spkes, rugs,tapestries, perfume, rich clothing, or jewels.The roc ranges for food three times a day; about an hour aftersunrise, at noon, and an hour before sunset, if there are young inthe nest, a fourth feeding, approximately two hours after noon,is added to keep the young strong and well-fed.Ecology: Rocs are occasionally tamed and used by cloud orstorm giants. Good-aligned giants do not allow their rocs to at¬tack civilized areas and the animals therein.As mentioned before, rocs do not nest too closely together,since such a high concentration of these hungry predators woulddeprive entire regions of its animal population. Rocs serve tokeep down the number of large predators, as they are fond ofankheg, purple worms, and harpies. Thanks to the rocs' prodi¬gious appetites, these creatures are not swarming about with im¬punity.It is said that roc feathers can be used in the manufacture ofQwijafs feather tokens, as well as uimgs and brooms of flying.One race that has little love for rocs is dwarves, Dwarvenmines located in remote mountains often have to contend withunruly rocs intent on protecting their territory. Attempts by thedwarves to tame rocs have all met with failure, so the acceptedmanner of dealing with rocs is to kill them and smash their eggs.Adventurers who happen on a community of mountain dwarvesmay find employment as roc hunters. Such groups would do wellnot to allow any druids to find this out.
SubterraneanRareSolitaryDarknessCarnivoreExceptional (15-16)See belowChaotic evilA roper resembles a rocky outcropping. The creatures hide isyellowish gray and rough and its body very malleable. They areusually pilbr-Itke in shape, 9 feet tall about 3 feet in diameter atthe base, and about 1 foot in diameter at the top. The roper has asingle yellow eye. and a maw ringed with sharp teeth. Halfwayup its body are small bumps which are the sources of the strandsit fires at opponents (see below). Ropers have the same body tem¬perature as their surroundings.Combat: A roper can stand upright to resemble a stalagmite, lieon the ground to imitate a boulder, or even flatten itself to looklike a lump on a cavern floor. They can change color a little,enough to blend into rocky backgrounds. Opponents suffer a -2penalty to surprise rolls when faced by a roper.Ropers attack by shooting strong, sticky strands at opponents.They can shoot a total of six strands, one per round, as far as 50feet: each strand can extend (ld4 +1) x xc feet and pull up to 750pounds. Each time a strand hits (requiring a normal attack roll)the victim must make a successful saving throw vs* poison or losehalf its Strength (round fractions down). Strength loss occurs Id3round after a hit, is cumulative for multiple hits, and lasts for 2d4turns.If a roper s prey cannot break Iree, it is pulled 10 feet closer perround; when it reaches the roper, the creature bites the victim for5d4 points of damage (automatic hit against a victim held by astrand). A strand can be pulled off or broken by a character whomakes a successful open doors roll. A strand can also be cut; it isAC 0, and it must take at least 6 points damage from a single hitof an edged weapon to be severed.Ropers are unaffected by lightning and take only half damagefrom cold-based attacks. They have a -4 penalty to savingthrows vs. fire.Habitat Sodety: Ropers are not social and rarely cooperate withone another, though a group of them may be found in a goodhunting spot. A group of ropers has been named a 'cluster'' byscholars with nothing better to do*Ropers reproduce asexually by shedding some of their materialin the form of a seed. Drawing nutrients from the cavern floor(and perhaps siphoning magical energies from deep within theearth), the infant roper grows to maturity In 2d4 weeks. Until thattune has passed, the roper is indistinguishable from a boulder.Ropers move using large, cilia-like appendages on their under¬sides, which also allow them to cling to walls and ceilings. Theyseldom leave the caverns, but may migrate to a new feedingground when prey population drops too low in its current home*Migration usually occurs through underground tunnels, butwhen this is not possible, ropers travel late at night, sometimesgiving rise to stories of walking stones.Ecology: Ropers eat any meat but prefer demihumans and hu¬mans, Gnomes, dwarves, and other mining races often serve asprey for ropers,A roper has a gizzard-like organ which often holds undigestedtreasure. Platinum and gems cannot be digested by a roper, so itsgizzard holds 3d6 platinum pieces, and has a 35% chance ofholding 5d4 gems. The glue from a ropers strands is prized byalchemists, as are its digestive adds, which must be stored inplatinum vials,A "stone-roper" is a roper with a more stony, less flexible exteri¬or; it resembles a statue of a roper. Its rocky tentacles are alwaysextended at least 20 feet, and can shoot to 50 feet to attack prey.The storoper can attack with all its tentacles at the same time,preferring to attack two victims with three tentacles each. Tvriceper day, the storoper can inject venom through its tentacles. Vic¬tims must make a successful saving throw vs. poison or be para¬lyzed for one round, then fight to aid the storoper; the venomlasts for 10 turns. Storopers' stony exteriors give them total pro¬tection from normal missiles. Storopers have 6 HD. but have allthe other abilities and statistics of a 10 HD roper.
Rust monsters are subterranean creatures with an appetite for allsorts of metals. These unique creatures, though generally inof¬fensive, are the bane of fighters everywhere.The average rust monster measures 5 feet long and 3 feet highat the shoulder It has a strange tail that appears armor platedand ends in an odd-looking bony projection that resembles adouble-ended paddle. Two prehensile antennae are located underthe thing's two eyes. The hide of the rust monster is rough, cov*ered with lumpy projections. Coloration varies from a yellowishtan on the underside and legs, to a rust red upper back. Rustmonsters smell like wet. oxidized metal.Combah Rust monsters are placid by nature, but when they getwithin scent range of metal they become excited and immedi¬ately dash toward the source. Rust monsters can smdl metal upto 90 feet away. If the rust monsters antennae touch metal (deter¬mined by a successful attack roll), the metal rusts. Magical itemshave a chance of being unaffected equal to 10% for each plus (a+ 2 weapon or armor has a 20% chance of not being affected).Any affected metal rusts or corrodes and immediately falls topieces that are easily eaten and digested by the creature. Metalweapons striking a rust monster are affected just as if the crea¬ture's antennae had touched them. Should a nonweapon metallicmagical item happen to make contact with a rust monster, treat itas a +2 magical weapon for purposes of determining whether ornot it breaks up.Rust monsters, being none too bright, stop pursuing a fleeing par¬ty for one round to devour metallic items, such as a handful of ironspikes, a mace or a hammer if the party throws them behind. Rustmonsters go after ferrous metals such as iron, steel and magical steelalloys, such as miihril and adamantite. They choose such metalsover valuable metals such as copper, gold, silver, or platinum. Infact, they would continue to pursue a party that just dropped a fist¬ful of copper corns, for example, in hopes of getting the much-preferred ferrous metal of armor and weapons.Sometimes (50% chance), a rust monster will even pause forone round during combat in order to eat. Rust monsters are notknown for being tacticians, just ravenously hungry metal-eaters.Feeding time always takes one round regardless of the size of themetal mealHabitat/Society: Rust monsters dwell only in dark, subterra¬nean places such as caverns and underground structures. Theyare not disposed to groups: often a lair comprises one or two rustmonsters, with a 5% chance of encountering a single offspring,which acts as a half-strength rust monster with a full-strength ap¬petite. These creatures have been known to range the length andbreadth of an underground complex, searching for supplies ofmetal. Though it will eat raw ore, a rust monster always prefersthe refined, forged metal (just as a human would prefer fresh,filtered water over swamp water).The creatures relatively inoffensive nature makes it an un¬likely target. There have been many accounts of mages ap¬proaching a rust monster and the only reaction from the beastwas a cursory sniff, then a leisurely departure. Dwarves andgnomes, known for metalworking and mining, have no sympa¬thy for rust monsters, and will do anything to get rid of them.The only treasure to be found in a rust monster lair h gems,usually the sort used for decoration on armor or sword pommels.Rust monsters have no grand designs, only the wish to keep well-fed.Ecology: Rust monsters help in removing metallic junk andclutter from underground fastnesses. In fact. It is not unusual tofind a rust monster and a carrion crawler working in a symbioticrelationship, with the latter eating the organic litter and the farm¬er consuming the metal castoffs.
Lieutenant: 270Chieftain: 420Priestess: 650Baron: 975Prince: 2,000Sahuagin are a vicious, predatory race of fish-men that live inwarm coastal waters. They are highly organized and greatly en-joy raiding shore communities for food and sport.Typical sahuagms are blackish green on their backs, shading togreen on their bellies, with black fins. Their great, staring eyes aredeep, shining black. They have scaly skin, with webbed fingers andtoes, and their mouths are filled with sharp fangs. About 1 in 216sahuagin is a mutation with four usable arms. These specimens areusually black shading to gray Females are indistinguishable frommales, except that they are slightly smaller. Hatchlings are a lightgreen color, but they darken and attain full growth approximatelyone to two months after hatching.Combat: Though they wear no armor, their scales are toughand equal to AC 5. Sahuagin wear a harness to carry their per¬sonal gear and weapons, A group of these creatures is typicallySpears are used only as thrusting weapons. Nets are set withdozens of hooks that make escape virtually impossible for unar¬mored victims or creatures not able to grasp and tear with aStrength of 16 or greater. Nets are replaced by three javelinswhen the band forays onto land, The crossbows fire a maximumof 30 feet underw ater and normal ranges on the surface. Tridentshave three uses—to spear small prey to pin prey trapped in nets,and to hold threatening opponents at bay.Sahuagin are well-equipped to attack even without weapons,for their webbed hands each end in long, sharp claws that caninflict 1-2 points of damage per attack. Their powerful rear legsare likewise taloned. and if they kick an opponent with them,they inflict ld4 points of damage with each hit from either foot.The sharp teeth of the sahuagin cause ]d4 points of damage if abite is scored on a victim. Thus, it is possible for an unarmedsahuagin to attack three or five times in a melee round causing T2/1-2/1-4 and an extra 1-4/1-4 if the legs can rake.The eyes and ears of these monsters are particularly keen.They can see for 300 feet underwater at depths of up to 100 feet.For each 100 feet of greater depth, their vision is reduced by 10feet (e.g.. when 500 feet deep they can see 260 feet; when 1,000feet deep they can see 210 feet). Their ears are so sharp as to beable to detect the clinking of metal at one mile, or a boat oarsplashing at twice that distance.A band of sahuagin is always led by a chieftain. He has onelieutenant for every ten members of the group. The chieftain has4+4 Hit Dice, and his lieutenants have 3 + 3 Hit Dice, All are inaddition to the normal sahuagin in the group.When raiding villages, sahuagin attack en masse, with leadersin the second rank. As long as there is no truly spirited resistance,they continue in their plunder and violence.Underwater, in their natural element, the sahuagin are farmore confident. Using the three-dimensional aspect of under¬water fighting, they sometimes dive down on a group of under¬water explorers, coming in from behind, and swooping downand past them, dropping nets on their intended victims.When sahuagin attack ships, they swarm up from all sides and tryto overwhelm with numbers. They often grab their opponents andhurl them into the sea, where at least a fourth of the raiding partylurks, waiting for such an action or as reinforcements. Some leaderscarry a conch shell, which when sounded gives the signal for thegroup of sahuagin in reserve to enter the fraySahuagin have an almost paralyzing fear of spell casters. Theydirect their strongest attacks toward anyone who uses spells orspdl-like powers, such as the functions of some magical items,Their saving throws vs, fire-based spells suffer a -2 penalty, andthey receive an additional point of damage per die of damagefrom such attacks.H a bi ta t. Sorie ty: The sahuagin are someti mes ref erred t o a s "seadevils" or "devil men of the deep." They dwell in warm salt watersat depths of 100 to 1.500 feet, Sahuagm are predatory in the ex¬treme, and they pose a threat to all laving things because they killtor sport and pleasure as well as for food. They abhor fresh wa¬ter They dislike light, and bright light such as that created by acontinual light spell is harmful to their eyes.The social structure of the sahuagin is based upon rule by aking who holds court in a vast city deep beneath the waves. Thisoverlord s domain is divided into nine provinces, each ruled by aprince. Each prince has 2dl0 + 10 nobles underneath him. Eachnoble controls the small groups of sahuagin dwelling in his fief.The sahuagin worship a great devil-shark. Sahuagin priestsabove 5th level are very rare.The king is supposed to dwell in a city somewhere at the great¬est depth that a sahuagin can exist. This place is supposedly builtin an undersea canyon with palaces and dwellings built alongeither bee. There, fully 5,000 of these monsters live, not count¬ing the king's retinue of queens, concubines, nobles, guards, etc. ,said to number 1,000 or more. The sahuagin king is reported tobe of enormous size [10 Hit Dice+ 10 hit points), and of greatestevil. The king is always accompanied by nine noble guards (9 + 9Hit Dice) and the evil high priestess of all sahuagin (9+9 HitDice) with its retinue of nine underpriestesses (7th-level clerics).If sahuagin are encountered in their lair r there are the followingadditional sahuagin ■3d4 x 10 females (2 Hit Dice)ld4 x 10 hatchlings (1 Hit Die)Also, there is a 10% chance per 10 male sahuagin that there is anevil priestess and ld4 assistant priestesses, for the religious life ofthese creatures is dominated by the females. If a priestess is withthe group in the lair, it is of ld4 + l level ability, and the lesserclerics are 3rd or 4th level.There are always 2d4 sharks in a sahuagin lair. Sahuagin areable to make these monsters obey simple one- or two-word com¬mands. Whenever a sahuagin lair is encountered, there is a 5%chance that it is the stronghold of a prince. The prince has 8+6Hit Dice phis nine guards of chieftain strength. There are also oneSth-levd sahuagin evil high priestess and four 4rh-levd unde¬rpriestesses. The numbers of males, females, hatchlings and eggsin a prince s lair are double the numbers given above. There are4d6 sharks present at all times.Sahuagin lairs are actual villages or towns, constructed ofstone. The buildings are domed, and the seaweed and similar ma¬rine plants growing around and on these buildings make themhard to detect.Few persons have survived capture by the sahuagin, for pris¬oners are usually quickly tortured and eaten. Any creatures tak¬en alive from raids or intercepting unwelcome visitors arebrought to the sahuagins' lair and confined in cells. Although sa-iteiSgvft snr aiAr to oxflf o/ avatar for to iW tWcafy, AJ&stp kno air in the confinement areas in the typical village, but in thetowns of the nobles there are special quarters to maintain air-breathing creatures. The sahuagin set aside a few prisoners totorture and provide sport—typically a fight to the death betweentwo different creatures in an arena. The bulk of captives are sim¬ply killed and eaten. It is seldom that any prisoner escapes, al¬though the sahuagin find spori in allowing captives to think thatthey have found freedom, only to be encircled by sadistic guardswhile a school of sharks moves in for the kill*The sahuagin are cruel and brutal, and the strongest alwaysbully the weaker, Any injured, disabled, or infirm specimen isslain and eaten by these cannibalistic monsters. Even imperfecthatchlings are dealt wi th in this fashion. This strict law has devel¬oped a strong race, however, and any leader is subject to a chal¬lenge. Sahuagin never stop growing, although they grow veryslowly, and death comes to most before the years allow growth tolarge size. Leaders are always the largest and strongest. It is re¬ported that the nine sahuagin princes are each ol the four-armedsort, as is the king. In any event, the loser of a challenge is alwaysslain, either during combat or afterward. Sometimes the loserwinds up as the main course at the victory feast.Duels are fought without weapons, only fang and claw beingpermitted.The sahuagin are chronicled because of their great evil, havingtime and again raided the land, desolating whole coasts, and de¬stroying passing ships continually. The exact origin of the sa¬huagin is unknown. It is suggested that they were created from anation of particularly evil humans by the most powerful lawfulevil gods in order to preserve them when the great deluge cameupon the earth. Some sages claim that they are degenerate hu¬mans who formerly dwelt on the seacoasts, whose evil and de¬pravity was so great that they eventually devolved into fish-folkand sought the darkness of the ocean depths. The tritons how¬ever, are purported to have believe that sahuagin are distantlyrelated to sea elves, claiming that the drow spawned the sa¬huagin.Sahuagin range as far as 50 miles from their lairs. Most of theirlairs are located 2dl0 + 20 miles from coastal shores. Some ofthese creatures enjoy collecting pearls and coral formations,fashioning them into jewelry. This jewelry is worn as a statussymbol. They are fond of wealth, which they use as a measure ofinfluence, and for sacrifice to the deities that they worship in ex¬change for granted powers and other favors. Most of the treasurefound in a sahuagin lair belonged to former victims. There is usu¬ally a high concentration of water-related items, such as magicalboats, tridents, helms, potions, necklaces, etc. These were gainedfrom adventurers who explored underwater too close to the sa¬huagin community.These creatures w T ant nothing less than full control of the seacoasts, collecting as much wealth and power as possible in theprocess while maintaining the secrecy ol their lairs’ locations.Those who attempt escape are obsessively hunted down, for fearthat the former prisoners may reveal Lhe location of the sa-huagins cityEcology; Sahuagin venture ashore on dark, moonless nights toraid and plunder human coastal towns. They hate even the evilixitxaehitl, and only sharks are befriended by them.The feuds and outright warfare between the sahuagin and ixit-xachitl have indirectly contributed to preventing the ascendancyof the spellcasling, manta ray-like race. Sahuagin are also fond ofthe deep has kept the squid and kraken numbers down to a safelevel. Conversely, these beasts enjoy eating sahuagin, which pre¬vents the sahuagin from overrunning coastal areas.Of all the sea-dwelling races, tritons, sea dves, dolphins, andhippocampi are the most implacable enemies of the sahuagin. infact, the few air-breathers that have escaped the sahuagin owetheir freedom to such beings that bravely aided the captives.Abo called fauns, satyrs are a pleasure loving race of half-human, half-goat creatures. They symbolize natures carefree ways. Satyrs have thetorso, head and arms of a man, and the hind legs of a goat. The humanhead is surmounted by two sharp horns that poke through the satyrscoarse, curly hair. The skin of the upper body ranges from tan to lightbrown, with rare individuals (1%) with red skin. A satyr's hair b medi¬um, reddish, or dark brown. The horns and hooves are black.Satyrs have their own tongue and can speak elven and Common Sa¬tyrs living near centaurs are 80% likely to be friendly with them andspeak their language. Rarely (5%), satyrs are found with korred.Combat! Satyrs have keen senses, so they gain a +2 bonus on surpriserolls They can be almost silent , and can blend with foliage so as to be9Q% undetectable; this gives opponents a -1 penalty to surprise rolls.Satyrs have infravision to a distance of 60 feet,A satyr attacks by butting with its sharp horns. Some (20% ) use +1magical weapons especially long or short swords, daggers, or shortbows. Before resorting to combat, a satyr often plays a tune on its pipes,an instrument only a satyr can use properly. Using these pipes, the satyrcan cast charm, sleep or cause fear, affecting all within 60 feel, unlessthey make a successful saving throw vs. spell.Usually only one satyr per band has pipes. If comely females (Charisma15 +) are in a group met by satyrs, the piping will be to rrhumt Should theintruders be relatively inoffensive, the piping casts sleep, and the satyrs stealall of the victims choice food and drink, as well as weapons, valuables, andmagical items. If intruders are hostile, the piping is used to cause fear Theeffects of the piping lasts Ido hours or until dispelled. Any creature that savesvs. piping is not affected by additional music from the same pipes in thatencounter. A bards singing can nullify the pipes music before it takes effect.Habitat-Society: Satyrs are interested only in sport: frolicking, piping, chas¬ing wood nymphs, and other pleasures. They resent intrusions and driveaway any creature that offends therm A lucky wanderer may stumble on awoodland celebration, which will contain an equal number of dryads andfauns plus 3dS other woodland creatures and a 25% chance of 2d6 centaursStrangers are welcomed only if they contribute some good food and drink,especially superior (10 + gp per bottle) wines. Such wine can also be used tolore or bribe satyrs. It a group includes elves, they have a better chance ofbeing welcomed.These celebrations last all night in warm months, with newcomers wakingup the next morning with massive headaches, minus a few valuables, and nota woodland creature (nor their tracksj to be found.Shying away from the trapping* of an organized society a colony of satyrsusually includes young numbering 50% of the adults Satyrs live in comfort¬able caves and hollow trees There are no female satyrs and sages believe thatdryads are the female counterparts of the satyr, and that satyrs mat*; withdryads to produce more satyrs and dryads. Satyrs share the dryads affectionfor humans of the opposite sex, but a female charmed by a satyr might returnafter Id4 weeks (10% chance).Satyrs are an inoffensive, fun-loving rate. They rarely venture morethan 10 miles from their homes, most often doing so to gather food, Theyare fond of venison and small game but also eai plants and fruits,Ecology; Satyrs in sylvan woodlands* keep game animal populations atnormal levels; they never hunt to excess or despoil plantsThis small, dance-loving relative of the satyr looks much like its cousins,but lacks horns, and has wildly flowing beard and hair, Korred smell likepine trees and fresh earth. They usually wear leather britches, Carry largeleather pouches, and wield oaken cudgels, They have loud voices andspeak their own language, plus those ol satyrs, dryads, centaurs, andelves: a few even speak druidic.Korred have 18/76 Strength. They hurl boulders up to 100 feel (dam¬age Id&h ot use cudgels (ld& damage), shears tld4 damage), or fists (ld2damage), gaming a +4 to damage because of their Strength.Korred can weave their hair into entangling ropes and snares in ld4rounds. Such ropes have AC 1, 5 hp, and a movement rate of 3. Anyoneattacked by the ropes must make a saving throw vs. spells or be entan-gled. The ropes sometimes guard special areas.A korred may use its magical Imigh three times per day: unless it Is nullifiedby a bards singing, all within 60 feet must roll above their Charisma scare orbe stunned for ld4 rounds, Korred can also use the following abilities at will,one per round; stone shape, animate rock, stone door (teleport 30'), shatterrock, transmute rock to mud. and stone tellKorred do not have structured communities: families in a common clanlive within 5 miles of one another. Korred do not tolerate outsiders, ex¬cept for rare rangers, druids, and elves. Even these must not interrupt theweekly korred dance. Those who interrupt must make a saving throw vs.spells or dance themselves, losing ld4 hp per round until dead or re¬strained. or until the korred stop playing and dancing.Korred pouches contain hair, shears, and other items. These items turnto gold (5d4 * 10 gp valucl if sprinkled with holy water. A korred will notvoluntarily give up this pouch
Giant scorpions are vicious predators that live almost anywhere, in¬cluding relatively cold places such as dungeons, though they Favordeserts and warm lands. These creatures are giant versions of thenormal 4-inch-long scorpion found in desert climes.The giant scorpion has a green carapace and yellowish green legsand pincers. The segmented tail is black, with a vicious stinger on theend. There is a bitter smell associated w ith the scorpion, which prob¬ably comes from the venom. They make an unnerving scrabblingsound as they travel across dungeon Floors.Combat: The giant scorpion is 95% likely to attack any creature thatapproaches. The creature has a hard, chitinous carapace that gives itArmor Class 3. This monster attacks by grabbing prey with its twohuge pincers, inflicting TIO points of damage each, while it lashes for¬ward with its tail to sting Thus, it can fight three opponents at once. Ifa giant scorpion manages to grab a victim in a pincer, it will automati¬cally inflict l-10 points of damage each round until it releases the vic¬tim. The victim has but one chance to escape. If he can make his fiendbars/lift gates roll, he will escape the claw. However, this can be thecharacters only action that round and it can be tried only once percombat. If the sting is employed against an untrapped victim, an attackroll is required for a successful attack, but a trapped character is auto¬matically struck by any stmg attack directed at him with no attack rollrequired.The sting inflicts 1-4 points of damage and the victim must saveversus poison or die the next round (type F), Note that scorpions arenot immune to their own poison. If a scorpion is reduced to 1 or 2 hitpoints, it will go into a stinging frenzy, stinging everything in sight,gaining two attempts to hit per round with only the tail. Slain crea¬tures are dragged to the scorpion's burrow lo be eaten,Habitat/Societyr Giant scorpions live in underground burrows ordungeons. Each lair may (20%) have 5d4 scorpion eggs. These beastseat any living creature that is unfortunate enough to stray too closeto their lair. Any treasure found comes from the bodies of human ordemihuman victims that have been dragged here to be consumed.Armor is rarely found intact, since the scorpion will surely have usedits pincers to cut up its prey.Ecology: These bizarre insects contribute to the ecosystem by feed¬ing on other giant versions of insects such as spiders and ants. Theythemselves are prey for purple worms and other huge, subterraneancreatures. Alchemists and assassins prize the scorpion s venom be¬cause of its potency.Often found in dungeons and wildernesses, these creatures are merelysmaller versions of the giant scorpion. Colors range from tan to brown toblack, and rumors persist of rare white scorpions deep underground. Allattack with pincers and tail stinger. If struck by the stinger, the victimmust save versus poison or die the next round. However, the poison ofthe large scorpion is weaker than normal (type A, 15 0 points damage?giving the victim a +2 on his saving throw. Huge scorpions have deadly(type F) poison and can pin a victim in a way similar to the giant scorpi¬on, but with the huge scorpion the victim can still fight back. It is notunusual to see scorpions of various sizes fighting with each other.
A sea lion is a fearsome creature with the head and torepaws of alion and the body and tail of a fish.Combat: Sea lions are ferocious and difficult to deal withi, Theyare very territorial and usually attack anything that enters theirdomains, no matter what the size. Their vicious teeth and hugepaws are a match even for most sharks, which they hate above allother creatures. Sea lions must attack the same opponent withpaws and teeth and cannot divide attacks. Any creature hit byboth paw attacks in the same round is being mauled. Mauledcreatures cannot attack if they have not already done so thatround and must roll a successful open doors roll to free them¬selves. When mauling a creature, the lion follows up with a biteattack with a + 4 bonus to the attack roll, causing double damageif successful.The head of a sea lion, with its thick mane, is treated as AC 5,while the rest of its scaly body is AC 3.Sea lions are very difficult to raise in captivity, but can becomethe best and most loyal of steeds. In fact, they are arguably Lhemost powerful mountable creature beneath the waves. They arevery useful as guarding and hunting beasts, since their tremen¬dous roar can be heard for up to 10 miles underwater, providingample time to prepare for an attack or to send help. They are notas skillful swimmers as are sea horses—they are the underwaterequivalents of Maneuverability Class B creatures.Habitat Society: Sea horses and sea lions almost never en¬counter one another as sea lions prefer to dwell in the shallowcoastal regions, while sea horses delve the deeps. This is primari¬ly due to their respective dietary differences. Sea horses eatplankton, while sea lions eat any type of meat, be it a fish, dino¬saur, or wandering herd animals caught drinking at the watersedge. Sea lions are not afraid of land and it is not unheard of forsea lions to drag themselves a few dozen yards up the beach insearch of meals. While these attacks are rare indeed, the reportsof sea lions in the vicinity does tend to foster more fear amongthe general populace than a simple shark aLtack does. But in aworld of krakens, dinosaurs, and vampires, sea lions are a rela¬tively minor threat.Sea lions roam the seas in packs, what might be called a prideof lions on land. The strongest one (usually with maximum hitpoints) is the leader. In a sea lion pack, both sexes hunt and carefor young, but the males are superior hunters, something thatdifferentiates them from their land-based cousins.While sea lions rarely travel anywhere with specific goals inmind, they do sometimes team up to aid other packs of lions,usually when they roam close enough to hear the collective bel¬lowing of their comrades. But territoriality comes into play im¬mediately after the kill is made, and rarely does the reigningleader allow the helpful newcomers to share in the spoils of thevictory. Often a new battle for power ensues between the twoleaders. If the resident leader wins, the newcomers leave withouta taste of meat. If the newcomer wins, he and his pack remainjust long enough to take first choice of flesh, and then depart forhome. The remaining leader, vanquished and weakened beforehis peers, rarely lives long enough to enjoy the spoils.Ecology: Sea lions hate sharks, often going to great lengths tohunt them down. The taste of sharks is apparently abhorrent tosea lions and they always leave the carcass uneaten, so it is some¬thing of a mystery why this rivalry exists. Some sages claim thatit is the result of conflicts between the lesser deities of nature, butit is more likely two strong predators vying for supremacy of theseas.Became of the water-proofing qualities of their thick scales,sea lions can remain out of water for up to 24 hours before theirgills dry out and become incapable of removing oxygen from thewater. If a sea lion is fed a constant source of water into itsmouth, it can survive for an entire week before disease enters thecracking scales and starvation takes its tolL It is theoreticallypossible to keep a sea lion in captivity but, like most aquatic car¬nivores, the restriction of space is often psychologically toomuch for the creature and death slowly takes the once-proudbeast.Cold to subarctic watersVery rareSolitary or tribalAnyAverage to exceptional (6-16)A (magic only), RNeutral (good)Selkies are seal-like beings that have the ability to change intohuman form for a few days at a time.When in their true, seal-like forms, they are nearly indistin¬guishable from normal seals. Close inspection of their arms,however will reveal the presence of slightly webbed hands in¬stead of fore flippers and legs instead of a tapering body and rearflippers. Once a month, each selkie is able to assume human formfor about a week* Usually selkies prefer to briefly visit the realmof men (which they call the ’overworkT) out of curiosity, butsometimes they are ordered to go forth and purchase desperatelyneeded supplies or information. When in human form, selkies arevery attractive indeed and their fine looks have broken morethan a few overwurlderV hearts. Their eyes are particularly no¬ticeable as they are always either a bright emerald green or star¬tling light blue. Since the selkie transformation is not a spell ormagical effect, only spells like true seeing will reveal a selkiestrue nature, although their peculiar mannerisms and predilectionfor seafood also might.Combat: Since selkies are unable to swim quickly while carry¬ing weapons, 90% of selkies encountered underwater will be un¬armed, They use their sharp teeth whenever they are corneredbut prefer to use their impressive speed underwater to escape su¬perior odds. If encountered on land, selkies are wise enough tobear human weapons, most likely swords scavenged from thewrecks of ships (see below).Habitat'Society: Selkie communities are divided between maleand female, with females usually outnumbering males, as maleselkies are the hunter gatherers throughout the often dangerouswaters nearby. However, both aspects of selkie ‘‘community*(domestic and provider) are equally respected within the lair, andno sex is accorded undue privileges.Selkies inhabit only colder waters and there are both saltwaterand freshwater varieties. Selkies almost always build their lairs inhuge, underwater caverns and grottos containing both air andwater-filled regions— selkie young must be raised in an air-filledenvironment for about their first year.As mentioned earlier, selkies often find and explore wrecks ofsunken treasure. Most selkie communities have hoarded at leastsome booty (especially pearls), keeping those otherwise uselesstrinkets only for purposes of trade with the overworld. Onlyselkies who have visited the overworld many times have everacquired a taste for ornamenting themselves like overworlders,and can be distinguished from more traditional selkies immedi¬ately, For obvious reasons, these more experienced selkies areoften the best representatives to deal with if one is an over-worlder. Selkies can be hired and have a limited knowledge ofoverworlder customs. All magical treasure recovered by selkiesis immediately commandeered for the good of the communityand the lair’s defense.Ecology: Selkies are omnivorous, preferring to eat fish, shell¬fish, crustaceans, and various forms of seaweed. Those that havevisited the surface are often partial to human fare as well. Selkiesare particularly susceptible to fine wine, which is to be expectedsince these intoxicants are unknown below the seas,Selkies are sensitive about their environment and harvest onlywhat they need to survive. It is worth noting that selkie repre¬sentatives lobby heavily whenever local overworlder environ¬mental issues threaten selkie existence. Most selkie communitieshave learned the value of dropping a few pearls here and there inorder to get what they want from men.While selkies in human form are quite beautiful, they are for¬tunate indeed that their pelts have little value in overworldermarkets. They are, therefore, without any special enemies be¬sides those common to seals and all ocean dwelling beings.Each venerable leader of a selkie community can cast the follow¬ing spells once per day, one spell per round: augur y, cure lightwounds, and cure disease. Leaders can also cast weather sum¬moning and control weather once per week. Selkies fear thewrath of the sea should they ever use their powers for ill.Roving bandsNight or darknessLiving beingsLow (5-7)2-5 + specialStrength drain+ 1 or better weapon to hitSee belowM (6" tall)Shadows are shadowy undead creatures that drain strength fromtheir victims with their chilling touch.Shadows are 90% undetectable in all but the brightest of sur¬roundings (continual light or equivalent), as they normally ap¬pear to be nothing more than their name would suggest. In brightlight they can be dearly seen.Combat: As shadows exist primarily on the Negative Materialplane, they have the ability to drain the life force of their victims.The chilling touch of a shadow inflicts 2-5 points of damage to itsvictim as well as draining one point of Strength. Lost Strengthpoints return 2-8 turns after being touched, If a human or demi-human opponent is reduced to zero Strength or zero hit points bya shadow the shadow has drained the life force and the oppo¬nent becomes a shadow as well. The newly formed shadow isthen compelled to join the roving band and pursue a life of evil.Other living creatures simply collapse from fatigue (if taken tozero Strength) or fall unconscious (if taken to zero hit points),where they are left to die or are hounded again upon waking.Shadows are immune to sleep, charm , and hold spells and areunaffected by cold-based attacks. They can be turned by clerics.Habilat'Society; Shadows travel in loosely organized packsthat freely roam ancient ruins, graveyards, and dungeons. Theyspecialize in terrifying their victims.Shadows have no leaders and thus spend much of their timeroaming aimlessly about their chosen surroundings. Contrary topopular belief, shadows do not hoard treasure. In fact, suchearthly baubles only help to remind the creatures of their formerlives. Instead, the furious undead throw all of the treasure theyrind away, in the same location (often at the bottom of a well ordeep pit j, where it is out of sight of the band. It is therefore specu¬lated that the removal of a shadow hoard would be quite easy(even welcomed), were it not for the fact that shadows attackliving beings without hesitation, regardless of their intent orthreat.Ecology; According to most knowledgeable sages, shadow’s ap¬pear to have been magically created, perhaps as part of some an¬cient curse laid upon some long-dead enemy. The curse affectsonly humans and demihumans, so it would seem that it affectsthe soul or spirit. When victims no longer cart resist, eitherthrough loss of consciousness (hit points) or physical prowess(Strength points), the curse is activated and the majority of Lhecharacter's essence is shifted to the Negative Material plane. Onlya shadow of their former self remains on the Prime Materialplane, and the transformation always renders the victim both ter¬ribly insane and undeniably evil.Attempts to remove the curse from captured shadows have allfailed, thus providing more clues into the nature of the disorder.A limited wish spell proved only partially successful as the victimreturned for an hour but remained insane for the duration. It hasbeen recently speculated that a full wish, followed by a heal spell,might be capable of restoring a shadow to his former state, butagain it must be emphasized that this is only a theory.Fortunately shadows rarely leave their lairs, and a bold partywishing to rescue a lost fighter or wizard should have plenty oftime to venture forth and recover their friend, provided that noone else explores the lair and slays the unfortunate characterwhile the shadows are absent.The original body of a victim is destroyed when changed to ashadow whether by the curse itself or by unprotected exposure toLhe Negative Material plane. In any case, killing a shadow ismerely a case of severing the bond between the Prime Materialand Negative Material forms.
Shedu are native to hot, arid climates, They have powerful,stocky equine bodies with short, powerful feathered wings. Theirheads are large and humanoid, and rather dwarven in appear¬ance. They always have beard sand mustache.s Shedu hair isvery bristly and curls into tight waves or bands.All shedu wear a simple headband made of braided cloth orrope, with a single button for adornment. The button is centeredon the forehead, and its material represents the bearers status.From the lowest rank to the highest, a button may be made ofsilver, gold, platinum, sapphire, ruby, or diamond. Lesser shedualmost never have a button above the platinum level, greater she¬du almost never wear one below sapphire status.Shedu wander the Prime material, astral and ethereal planes.They further the cause of law and goodness, help allied creaturesin need, and combat evil Greater shedu typically lead herds ofsix or more lesser shedu.Combat: All shedu attack with powerful front hooves. However,both forms of shedu prefer to use their psionic powers wheneverpossible.Languages: Lesser shedu speak shedu, lamia, lammasu, and mosthuman tongues (although not common). Of course, they can al¬ways use empathy (a limited form of telepathy, see below).Level Dis/SctfDev Attack Defense Score PSPs9 4/4/13 All/ALL - Int 100Lesser shedu always have the five powers listed below (withinthree disciplines), and they can use them without expendingPSPs, In addition to these powers, a lesser shedu knows anythree sciences and five devotions desired (from these disciplines,or others)* Each creature tends to specialize in a particular disci¬pline to complement the herd (each takes a different discipline).Greater shedu radiate protection from evil I0 T radius .Languages: Greater shedu speak shedu, lamia, lammasu, com¬mon, and root languages {Le. most human tongues). However,they can always rely upon telepathy, which they have masteredso well that they can even make rudimentary contact can bemade even with plants,Common powers (* denotes powers they always have, t denotesinnate abilities that are like the psionic powers, but require nopoint expenditures):Clairvoyance - Sciences: aura sight, dasraudience, clairvoyance,object reading, precognition Devotions: danger sense, sensitivityto psychic impressionsPsyehom eta holism - Sciences: energy containment, metamor¬phosis Devotions: body control, ectoplasmic form*tPsychokinesis * Sciences: telekinesis Devotions: molecular agita¬tion, molecular manipulationTelepathy - Sciences: domination, mass domination,mindlink * + Devotions: contact*, invisibility '+, post-hypnoticsuggestionPsychoportation - Sciences: probability travel'!, teleport*+ De¬votions: dimensional door, dimension walk*+
Temperate or tropical salt orfresh water, in wilderness areasRare (salt water) or very rare(fresh water}By weapon typeSong, spell powersSpell powers, water-breathing20 %Sirines are beautiful, human-like females, at home in any aquaticenvironment. They have human skin tones ranging to a lightyellow-green, and their hair can be almost any color, though sil¬ver and dark green are the most common* Sirines have beautifulfigures and wear scanty clothing at best.Most sirines are antisocial, so they try to drive intruders away,with evil sirines taking stronger measures. Other sirines are hun¬gry for social interaction, and try to lure male humans or demi-humans to join them for a time,Sirines speak their own language and the language of the near¬est intelligent races. They can breathe water and air and theyhave infra vision to a range of 120 feet*Combat: A lone sirine will always have 6 or 7 HD; each memberof a group has an equal chance for 4> 5. or 6 HD. All members ofa group have the same basic alignment I all evil, all good, or allneutral in regards to good and evil). All sirines can defend theirsolitude with some skill.Sirines have a Dexterity of 18: combined with their innatemagic, this grants them an exceptional Armor Class. Most (90%)sirines cany a short sword or a dagger, and 30% carry missileweapons, javelins or slings, as well Each weapon has a 10%chance of being magical, and jmwUns of lightning are common,Sirines also have several Spell-like abilities, each usable onceper day as an 11 th-level wizard: charm person, fog cloud , poly¬morph self, and improved invisibility. The charm ability is usedthrough the sirine's song, and all people within 30 feet are subjectto it, even if they are hostile or attacking.Lf the sirine touches an opponent, the victim must make a sav¬ing throw vs. poison; those failing to save are reduced to an Intel¬ligence of 2, The touch Is automatic for charmed individuals, butrequires a normal attack roll for others, A successful dispel magic(against llth-level casting) wilt restore the victim's intelligence,as will a sirines touch, if she so wills it. Any sirine can restoreintelligence taken by another sirine.Sirines make saving throws as llth-level wizards, with a +2bonus vs. poison. They are immune to all gas attacks.Habitat/Society: Sirines are encountered only in lonely placesthat are otherwise uninhabited. Most live near rocky outcrop¬pings or small islands in the sea. Some choose to live in freshwater, but tend to avoid these areas because they are usually pop¬ulated and sometimes difficult to reach.Young sirines often live with their sisters: these sirines are themore social type. As a sirine grows older, she becomes more re¬clusive and contemplative, however, and eventually looks for ahome of her own where she can think and sing in solitude. Eventhen, they have a rare desire for companionship,Sirines usually mate with male humans. Some sirines chooseelves, tritons, or merfolk as mates, producing children with someof their parents" traits (pointed ears from elves, green skin fromaquatic elves, scales and webbed fingers and toes from merfolkand tritons), Sirines never form lasting relationships, for the callof the sea is too great to bind them.After a gestation period of nine months, they give birth to ld4baby sirines, which are cared for by their mother until they arefive years old. After that, they fend For themselves, living on thebounty of the sea. Reaching adulthood at 10 years, they live forabout 50 years, and yet their beauty never leaves them.Sirines live to sing, and to think about the sea. If deprived oftheir voices, or confined away from water, they will slowly with¬er away until they die. Sirines often have great knowledge re¬garding the history of their area and any current events. Theysometimes trade this knowledge for companionship.Ecology: Sirines are not harmful to their environment in anymanner. They kill only enough to eat, and never take too muchfrom the sea. They have few natural enemies, and they are morethan able of taking care of themselves. Though they make beauti¬ful garments from sea shells, fish skin, and seaweed, they gainother belongings and treasure by scavenging shipwrecks.
All skeletons are magically animated undead monsters, createdas guardians or warriors by powerful evil wizards and priests.Skeletons appear to have no ligaments or musculature whichwould allow" movement Instead, the bones are magically joinedtogether during the casting of an animate dead spell. Skeletonshave no eyes or internal organs.Skeletons can be made from the bones of humans and demi-humans, animate of human size or smaller, or giant humanoidslike bugbears and giants.Combat: MarvsLzed humanoid skeletons always light withweapons, usually a rusty sword or spear. Because of their magicalnature, they do not fight as well as living beings and inflict only 1-6points of damage when they hit. Animat skeletons almost alwaysbite for 1-4 points of damage, unless they would obviously inflictless (Le,, skeletal rats should inflict only 1-2 points, etc.). Monsterskeletons, always constructed from humanoid creatures, use giant-sized weapons which inflict the same damage as their livingcounterparts but without any Strength bonuses.Skeletons are immune to all s/eep, charm , and hold spells. Be¬cause they are assembled from bones, cold-based attacks also doskeletons no harm. The fact that they are mostly empty meansthat edged or piercing weapons (like swords, daggers, andspears) inflict only half damage when employed against skele¬tons. Blunt weapons, with larger heads designed to break andcrush bones, cause normal damage against skeletons. Fire alsodoes normal damage against skeletons. Holy water inflicts 2-8points of damage per vial striking the skeleton.Skeletons are immune to fear spells and need never check mo¬rale, usually being magically commanded to fight to the death.When a skeleton dies, ti falls to pieces with bud dunks and rattles.Habitat Society; Skeletons have no social life or interestinghabits. They can be found anywhere there is a wizard or priestpowerful enough to make them. Note that some neutral priests ofdeities of the dead or dying often raise whole armies of animatedfollowers in times of trouble. Good clerics can make skeletonsonly if the dead being has granted permission (either before orafter death 1 and if the clerics deity has given express permissionto do so. Otherwise, violating the eternal rest of any being oranimal is something most good deities disapprove of highly.Skeletons have almost no minds whatsoever, and can obey on¬ly the simplest one- or two-phrase orders from their creators.Skeletons f ight in unorganized masses and tend to botch complexorders disastrously. It is not unheard of to find more than onetype of skeleton (monsters with animals, animals with humans)working together to protect their master's dungeon or tower.Ecology: Unless the skeletons remains are destroyed or scat¬tered far apart, the skeleton can be created anew with the appli¬cation of another animate dead spell. Rumors of high-levelanimate dead spells which create skeletons capable of reformingthemselves to continue fighting after being destroyed have notbeen reliably comfirmed.
Giant skeletons are similar to the more common undead skele¬ton, but they have been created with a combination of spells andare, thus, far more deadly than their lesser counterparts.Giant skeletons stand roughly 12 feet tall and look to be madefrom the bones of giants. In actuality, they arc simply humanskeletons that have been magically enlarged. They are normallyarmed with long spears or scythes that end in keen bone blades.Rare individuals will be Found carrying shields (and thus have anArmor Class of 3), but these are far from common. A small mag¬ical fire bums in the chest of each giant skeleton, a by-product ofthe magics that are used to make them. These flames begin justabove the pelvis and reach upward to lick at the collar bones.Mysteriously, no burning or scorching occurs where the flamestouch the bone.Giant skeletons do not communicate in any way. They canobey simple, verbal commands given to them by their creator,but will ignore all others, in order for a command to be under¬stood by these animated skeletons, it must contain no more thanthree distinct concepts. For example, "stay in this room, makesure that nobody comes in, and don’t allow the prince to leave,',would be the type of command these creatures could obey.Combat: In melee combat, giant skeletons most frequently attackwith bone-bladed scythes or spears. Each blow that lands inflictsId 12 points of damage.Once per hour (6 turns), a skeleton may reach into its chest anddraw forth a sphere of fire from the flames that bum within its ribcage. This flaming sphere can be hurled as if it were a fireball thatdelivers Sd6 points of damage. Because these creatures are im¬mune to harm from both magical and normal fires, they wrill free¬ly use this attack in dose quarters.Giant skeletons are immune to steep, charm, hold. or similarmind-affecting spells. Cold-based spells inflict half damage tothem, lightning inflicts full damage, while fire (as has alreadybeen mentioned) cannot harm them. They suffer half damagefrom edged or piercing weapons and but 1 point of damage perdie from all manner of arrows, quarrels, or missiles. Blunt meleeweapons inflict full damage on them*Being undead, giant skeletons can be turned by priests and pal*adins. They are more difficult to turn than mundane skeletons,however, being treated as if they were mummies. Holy water thatis splashed upon them inflicts 2d4 points of damage per vial.Habitat Society; The first giant skeletons to appear in Ravenloftwere created by the undead priestess Radaga in her lair within thedomain of Kartakass. Others have since mastered the spells andtechniques required to create these monsters; thus, giant skele¬tons are gradually beginning to appear in other realms where thedead and undead lurk.Giant skeletons are employed as guards and sentinels by thosewith the power to create them. It is said that the Dark Powers cansee everything that transpires before the eyes of these foul autonvatom, but there is no proof supporting this rumor.Ecology: Like lesser animated skeletons, these undead thingshave no true claim to any place in nature. They are created fromthe bones of those who have died and are abominations in theeyes of all who belief in the sanctity of life and goodness.The process by which giant skeletons are created is dark andevil. Attempts to manufacture them outside of Ravenloft havefailed, so it is dear that they are in some way linked to the DarkPowers themselves. In order to create a giant skeleton, a spellcaster must have the intact skeleton of a normal human or demi-human. On a night when the land is draped in fog, they must castan animate dead, produce fire, enlarge, and a resist fire spell overthe bones. When the last spell is cast, the bones lengthen andthicken and the creatures rises up. The the creator must make aRavenloft Powers check for his part in this evil undertaking.
By weapon (+ 3 to attack roll)See belowSee below90%Formerly powerful fighters, skeleton warriors are undead lordsforced into their nightmarish states by powerful wizards or evildemigods who trapped their souls in golden circlets. The sole rea¬son that skeleton warriors remain on the Prime Material plane isto search for and recover the circlets that contain their souls.A skeletal warrior appears as a cracked and yellowing skeletoncovered with shards of decaying flesh. Its eyes are black holescontaining pinpoints of reddish light. It is dad in the blackenedarmor and rotted trappings it wore in its former life.Combat: Anyone possessing a skeleton warriors circlet cancontrol its actions, so long as the controller remains within 240feet of the warrior. The controller is either in active control of thewarrior or in a passive mode. When in active control the con¬troller can see whatever the skeleton sees, and he can mentallycommand it to fight, search for treasure, or take any otheractions; however, the controller himself is unable to cast spells,move, or take any other actions while in active control. When inthe passive mode, the controller can take any normal actions, buthe is unable to see through the warrior's eyes; the skeleton war¬rior remains inert while the controller is in passive mode. Thecontroller can change between the passive mode and active con¬trol at willThe controller must have the warrior's circlet on his head inorder to control the warrior. If the circlet is removed from thecontroller's head, he can no longer control the warrior; likewise,if the controller and the warrior are separated by more than 240feet, the controller can no longer control the warrior. If the circletremains in the controllers possession, he can resume control at alater time. But if the controller loses the circlet, either by accidentor by a deliberate act, the warrior immediately proceeds towardthe controller at twice its normal movement rate (12) to attackand destroy him. The warrior does not rest until it destroys itsformer controller or until control is re-established. If the warriorholds the circlet to its head, both the warrior and the circlet turnto dust, never to reappear.When a character first comes into possession of a circlet, he isunlikely to be aware that the skeleton warrior is tracking him,unless he recognizes the circlet r s significance. To establish controlfor the first time, the character not only must hold the circlet tohis head, he must be able to see the warrior and concentrate onthe establishment of control for one round and then roll a suc¬cessful Wisdom check; if he fails the Wisdom check, he can tryagain in subsequent rounds. Meanwhile, the skeleton warriorcontinues to approach, attempting to destroy the character andgain possession of the circlet. If his concentration is broken be¬fore control is established—for instance, if he has to defend him¬self against an attack—he must concentrate again for threerounds. Once control has been established for the first time, itcan only be broken as indicated above. To be effective, the circletcannot be worn with any other headgear; placing it in a helm, forinstance, nullifies its powers, though the skeleton warrior is stillaware of the circlets presence.Skeleton warriors usually fight with two-handed swords, butthey can use other weapons as well. Skeleton warriors make allweapon attacks with a +3 bonus to their attack roll; this is aninnate ability, the weapon itself is not magical.Only magical weapons affect skeleton warriors. They have a90% magical resistance. The mere sight of a skeleton warriorcauses any creature with fewer than 5 Hit Dice to flee in panic.Skeleton warriors cannot be turned by priests.Habitat Society: Skeleton warriors are usually found near theareas where they died in their former lives, or where they wereburied. A skeleton warrior usually has a sizeable collection oftreasure, the remnants of a lifetime of adventure. Since a skeletonwarrior is preoccupied with recovering its tifdet, protecting itstreasure is not a priority.Ecology: Skeleton warriors are used by their controllers asbodyguards, servants, or workers. Since skeleton warriors areobsessed with their circlets and are theref ore undependable, evilcreatures and other undead seldom associate with them, Skeletonwarriors do not eat, sleep, or perform any other physiologicalfunctions.
The slaadi are great frog-like beings, who dwell on the outerplane of Limbo, Their form is that of a large bipedal frog, thoughsome of the more powerful slaadi have polymorph self or shapechange abilities and sometimes appear as men. In frog form theirheads are huge and their daws are extremely sharp. There arepowerful symbols embedded into their foreheads signifyingrank. They speak their own language and, occasionally, some ad¬ditional evil languages. Telepathy allows them to understand andconverse with all things.Slaadi are vicious combatants and quick to attack all other crea-lures. They can be ruthless when encountered in numbers, oftensurrounding smaller groups of beings and bullying and torment¬ing them before finally slaying the lot.Combat: Red slaadi attack with two daws for 1-4 points of dam¬age per hit and bile for 2-16 points. They are not terribly intelli¬gent, so they choose predictable, uninspired tactics.Red slaadi have a special gland under the skin of each daw.When one hits with a claw attack, there is a 25 % chance that anegg pellet is planted in its opponent's body The egg pellet beginsto move through the victim's body often without the victim evenknowing he has been infected until it reaches the chest cavityThere it gestates for three months, forming a baby red slaad thatwill eats it way out of the victims body killing him. The victimfalls very ill 24 hours before the baby slaad eats its way out. Anegg pellet can only be detected by a detect evil spelL and de¬stroyed by a remove curse or similar spell.Red slaadi regenerate at a rate of 3 hit points per melee round.They can attempt to gate in 1-2 additional red slaadi twice perday with a 35 % chance of success. Once per day red slaadi maystun by emitting a loud croak that affects all opponents within 20feet of the slaad. Victims must make a saving throw vs. petrifica¬tion or be disabled for two rounds.Blue slaad are ruthless warriors that specialize in mass combat.Combat: Blue slaadi have two razor-sharp bone rakes stickingout from the back of each hand. These potent weapons inflict 2-12 points of damage on a successful hit, They have perfectedtheir fighting style with these rakes* which give them two attacksper hand. Their bite does 2-16 points of damage per hit and has a10% chance of infecting the steads opponent with a rotting dis¬ease, Blue slaadi have the following magical abilities:hold person, one person only, passwail and tele kinesis.They may attempt to gflfe in either 1-4 red slaadi or 1-2 blueslaadi. four times per day with a 40% chance of success.Very rarely seen, they are the highest form of lesser slaadi. Theyattack vvlth daws for 3 to 3 (ld6+2) points of damage.Known as executioners, and very rare, gray slaadi are greatslaadi. They use a claw/claw/bite routine for 4 to 10 points ofdamage from their wicked daws, and 2 to 16 points of damagefrom the vicious bite they inflict upon opponents.The greatest of all the slaadi, and the absolute masters of theirrace. Their daws strike for 3 to 18 points of damage and Lheir biteinflicts 2 to 20 points of damage*Habitat Society: Slaadi have a hierarchiai society Their castesystem is rigid because the strong will simply destroy the weakfor disobedience: lesser slaadi are forced to be their servants.Reds and blues aid each other only in extreme emergencies.Ecology: Although slaadi are inhabitants of the outer planes* andare frequently found travelling the lower planes, they have littleor nothing to do with the Blood War between the baatezu and thetanar'ri.
Giant slugs are huge, omnivorous mutations of the small and be¬nign garden slugs. Their highly developed mouths are capable ofchewing flesh and well as plants, and they spit a highly corrosiveadd on their food. Most giant slugs are pale gray, with deadwhite underbellies.Combat: Giant slugs can bite for ld!2 points of damage, buttheir main attack form is their corrosive add saliva. The add isspat at a single target and corrodes any organic tissue (plants oranimalsl. It will also destroy equipment (saving throw vs, acid).The acid inflicts 4d8 points of damage (successful saving throwvs. breath weapon for one-half damage). Giant slugs can use thisbreath weapon every round (its acid stores are never used up).Slugs are not very accurate with this attack; the first shot hasonly a 10% chance of hitting. The success of subsequent shotsdepends on the distance to the target—the base chance of hittingis 90% at a distance of ten yards, with a -10% penalty per addi¬tional ten yards. If the slug misses, the acid hits 10 feet from thedesired target (determine randomly which direction). Note thatgiant slugs are impervious to this acid spittle.Giant slugs are immensely strong and can batter down doorsand wooden buildings in seconds. They have no bones and cansqueeze through holes and crevasses normally impassible tomuch smaller predators. For example, a party of adventurersmight seek cover in a large stone building, while taunting theslowly approaching slug behind them. To their astonishment, thehuge creature enters through the same doorway the party did andbegins to send acid everywhere.The rasping tongue of a giant slug enables it to burrow through1 foot of earth or 6 inches of wood per round, making moststandard barricades useless against it.Because of their lack of bones and their thick, rubbery hides,giant slugs are not harmed by blunt weapons or spells that causecrushing or impact damage. Only edged and pointed weaponsand magical attacks, can harm a giant slug.Habitat/Society: Giant slugs can be found in any wet and darkenvironment, including deserted dungeons, swamps, and rainforests. Giant slugs are solitary creatures and speak no language.They are barely sentient, exhibiting only rudimentary instinctivereactions when confronted.Ecology: No one has ever found a good use for giant slugs, ex¬cept maybe as huge garbage disposals. They have no knownpredators. They will eat anything—plants, carrion, garbage—but prefer warm, living flesh when they can catch it. Since giantslugs have such huge appetites, they rarely attach smaller crea¬tures, such as squirrels and monkeys, which they have a hardtime seeing anyway. Even cm a good day, they must usually sup¬plement their feedings with some vegetation.Normal slugs have a nasty reaction to salt when it is sprinkledon them. They dry up and die in ld4 + l rounds. If is unlikelythat this technique is adaptable to the giant variety but some fab¬rication and summoning spells might be adaptable if there everseemed to be a need for it.For now, giant slugs remain a very real danger in jungles, for¬ests, and dungeons everywhere.
Snakes are long, slender reptiles that can be found anywhere inthe entire world, even in the coldest arctic regions.There are basically two types of snakes, in all manner of sizes.The poisonous snakes make up tor their relatively smaller sizewith deadly venoms, while the larger constrictors squeeze theirvictims to death, Both types sleep far days after eating. Allsnakes shed their skin several times each year. All snakes in thisentry share the following characteristics:Snakes fear fire and will retreat from open flames, suffering a-6 morale modifier when flames are used against them.These monsters have heads at both ends, and both heads arearmed with poisonous fangs. The creature travels by graspingone of its necks and rolling like a hoop. It can attack with bothheads, each head attacking a separate target. Victims failing tomake a saving throw vs. poison when bitten die instantly. Am-phisbaena are immune to cold-based attacks.The boalisk is a tropical constrictor snake with a gaze attack.Any creature meeting its gnze (failing a saving throw vs. petrifi¬cation! is infected with a magical rotting disease, identical to thatinflicted by a mummy Characters refusing to look at the boaliskautomatically avoid its gaze but suffer a — 4 penalty to their AC.Surprised victims always meet its gaze and gain no saving throw.The boalisk can use its gszc on a single victim each round in addi-tion to normal biting and constriction attacks.Constrictors of all sizes hide in the branches of trees, waiting pa¬tiently until they can slowly lower themselves or suddenly droponto their unsuspecting victims. Once they strike, the victim isconstricted automatically suffering damage every round, Con¬stricted humanoid creatures can escape the coils of normal con¬strictors with a successful open doors roll Ut a -1 penalty}.Anyone who attempts to tree a captive by hacking at the con¬strictor has a 20% chance of striking the victim instead {roll nor¬mal damage and apply it to the victim), .Area spells like fireballwill likewise affect both combatants, but target-specific spellslike charm monster and magic missile are more precise.Common constrictor species include anacondas, boas, and re¬ticulate pythons, all of which can reach lengths of 30 feet. Theirskin is valuable, with an unblemished skm selling for as much asSome constrictor snakes are known as birdcharmers; these in¬nately magical snakes can mesmerize their prey by swaying slow¬ly and steadily while staring down their victims. Creatures ofanimal intelligence or less must make a saving throw against par-alyzation or be effectively paralyzed for as long as the snake con¬tinues to sway and for 2d6 rounds thereafter.Giant constrictor snakes are larger and much stronger than theirsmaller cousins. It requires the combined efforts oi 60 total pointsof Strength (the coiled victim plus outside help) to extricatesomeone from a giant constrictor's steel grasp.The skin of a giant constrictor snake is too thick and stiff to beworkable, and is valuable only as armor, not for decoration. Anuncured hide can fetch 20 gp,Snow serpents are a particularly large and dangerous form ofgiant constrictor snake, one adapted to life in a sub-arctic di¬mate. These furred white snakes hide their 100-foot bodies in thesnow bodies and wait for prey to pass by. When it does, theyspring up and coil their loops around the victims- After that,snow serpents automatically bite for 2d 10 points of damage eachround. Those in its coils are helpless. Snow serpents are very rareand have the following statistics: AC 6, MV 9, HD 10, THAC011 r SZ G (100' long), ML average (8-10), XP 2,000, Their pelt isworth 2,000 gp. In all other respects they are similar to other gi¬ant constrictor snakes.These intelligent snakes have slimy, poisonous skins that they useto foul wells and oases. After swimming in a body of water forseveral hours and releasing its poison, it slinks off to wait for itsprey to arrive. A creature drinking water poisoned by a hewaymust make a successful saving throw vs. poison at +2 or suffer30 points damage within 3d6 minutes and be paralyzed for td6hours, Creatures that make their saving throws suffer 15 pointsof damage. Even animals that survive the initial effects are oftendoomed to die of dehydration.Many humans and animals attack heways on sight, but it candefend itself with its hypnotic stare, which has a powerful effectany creature failing a saving throw vs + paralyzation will followthe heway to its lair and allow itself to be devoured. The he waysometimes uses this stare simply to immobilize a menacing crea¬ture. It then leaves the area while the hypnotized creature re¬mains stationary for ld6 turns,Heway are innate cowards and avoid contact with other ani-mals. It is a weak fighter, its bite is not venomous, and its jawsare weak, its preferred food is small animal carrion* Simplytouching heway skin has no effect; the poison must be ingested.All poisonous snakes deliver toxins automatically through theirbite. Roll on the table below for choose) to determine what typeof poison is present.Typical varieties of poisonous snakes include the asp. cobra,copperhead, coral snake, death adder, krait. mamba, puff adder,rattlesnake, sidewinder, and water moccasin.Some cobras and sidewinders hunt by night and can trackwarmblooded prey by body heat as well as by sight. They havethe equivalent of 30-foot infra vision. Black mambas are the fast¬est known snakes and can reach 30 across open ground,Giant poisonous snakes cause death in one round if their victimsfail a saving throw vs. poison. Some varieties inflict 3-18 pointsof damage even if the saving throw is made.The giant cobra is an example of a variant, giant poisonoussnake. Its venom results in death 2-8 rounds after a successfulstrike: if the victim makes a saving throw at =2 he suffers only10 points of damage. Giant cobras mesmerize prey as birdchar-mer snakes do (see above), They can kill and eat an entire goat ora demihuman up to halfling or gnome size. Some varieties of gi¬ant weasel can hunt them successfully, and jungle giants considergiant cobras a delicacy, as do some elven tribesmen.Found only in tropical waters* the giant sea snake is the only typeof snake that is both constricting and poisonous, Its constrictinggrasp on small ships can crush them in 10 rounds. Sea snakesattack ships only when they are hungry (20% chance). Their poi¬sonous bite is deadly in 1-4 rounds. Sea snakes are fully capableof diving to great depths, and their nostrils (on the top of theirsnouts) have membranes that automatically seal them under¬water.From time to time giant sea snakes gather in huge floatingmasses of hundreds or thousands of snakes, often 100 yards wideand 30 miles long. These may be mating rituals or they may beseasonal migrations: the actual reason is unknown.Spitting varieties of snakes bite their victims and can shoot poi¬sonous spittle at a single target within 30 feet. Their poison isidentical to normal poisonous snakes {see above). Typical speciesinclude the African spitting cobra, which can spit up to 15 feet.Its spittle can blind victims that fail a saving throw vs. poison.The blindness wears off after 2-12 hours.Many of the above land snakes can be encountered as treesnakes* also known as jaculi. These subspecies are simply arbore¬al varieties of other types of snakes that have adapted to life in aforest canopy. They have chameleonTike camouflage abilitiesand can leap onto their prey from 50 feet above ground: oppo¬nents suffer a -4 penalty to surprise rolls.Some tree snakes have broad, flat heads with razor spines orbarbs that make their initial impact particularly potent (doublenormal bite damage). After their initial flying attack, they mustdepend on biting or constriction attacks or climb back into thetrees to leap again.lacuit snakes include the poisonous boomslang and the emer¬ald tree boa. Many jaculi species prey on other snakes.Ancient snakes are said to gain wisdom with age, giving themSemi- to Low intelligence (2-7). They gain an additional Hit Dieand the ability to speak (with a lisp). Elder serpent venom is moreconcentrated than that of its younger cousins (death in 1-4rounds maximum, saving throws at —4). They suffer no modifierto morale when faced with open flames, Elder serpents have ameasure of cunning and value glittering objects; they have trea¬sure, type W.Elder serpents can paralyze prey as birdcatchers do (see con¬strictors above). In the case of elder boalisks, their gaze has twosimultaneous effects and victims are entitled to two savingthrows. All elder serpents can hypnotize people as well as ani¬mals with their paralyzing stare.The largest elder serpent is called the Grand Snakemaster, andis said to be immortal. When it sheds its skin, the discarded skinis rumored to possess healing powers. Those who eat it are saidto gain wisdom, but since the Grand Snakemaster has never beenseen, the truth of these rumors is questionable.
Winged serpents, sometimes called spark snakes, are colorfulreptiles that dwell in Zakhara's forests and jungles. Winged ser¬pents come in many colors, ranging from sky blue and emeraldgreen to raspberry red. They are supported by invisibly swift,gossamer wings, making them resemble reptilian hummingbirds.When their delicate wings are folded back, winged serpents canspider climb at will.Combat: Winged serpents move with liquid grace and devastat¬ing speed. They always receive a bonus to initiative.The bite of a winged serpent inflicts ld4 points of damage andinjects the victim with a corrosive, acidic fluid. This poison hasan onset time of 1 round and Inflicts an additional 2dS points ofdamage for the following 2 rounds (half damage if a save vs, poi¬son is made).By far the most dangerous attack of these reptiles is theirsparking breath weapon. Their wings beat so quickly that theybuild up a static charge from the ambient air (especially in thehumid forest}, A winged serpent can discharge this static electric¬ity from its mouth in a spark shower a cloud of dancing sparksand electrical energy 10 feet in diameter. Those caught in the areaof effect take 2d8 (2-16} points of damage (half if a save vs.breath weapon is made). The spark shower will also ignite anyexposed flammable objects, like clothes, hair, dry wood, or lampoil. Once it has been discharged, It takes one rum for a wingedserpent to build its static charge back up. All winged serpents areimmune to electricity.Winged serpents are vulnerable to fire-based attacks (especial¬ly their delicate wings), against which they save at penalty of ~2. If a winged serpent fails its saving throw against a fire attack,assume that Its wings are incinerated. Although this won't affectits ability to bite a victim, the serpent cannot use its breath weap¬on until the wings grow back.Habitat'Society; Winged serpents must eat constantly in order tosurvive. They flit about the jungle in small flocks, searching fortropica] fruits, from which they draw their nourishment. Awinged serpent will fly up to one and inject it with corrosive ven¬om. The venom breaks down the fruit into a soft, juicy mixture*partially digesting the fruit while it still remains in its skin. Theserpent will then suck out the fruity pulp through the incisionsmade by its fangs. A typical winged serpent will eat roughly 10times its weight in fruit each day, just to stay alive.Winged serpents mate as often as they eat (he., incessantly),although they do not care for their young, which are bom liveand wingless. They are bom with their spider climbing ability,which helps them climb fruit trees and search for food. Theyoung are dark green in color to help them blend in better withthe foliage, gaining their chromatic hues only after their wingsmature. During the first few months of life, winged serpents areextremely vulnerable to an entire host of predators that roam thejungle heights (including mundane snakes, monkeys, and giantinsects). Vestigial wings appear after a month of life, and becomefully functional after three months.Winged serpents have no permanent lair and hoard no trea¬sure.Ecology: Winged serpents play an important role in the jungleecology. Like giant bees, they transport pollen from fruit tree tofruit tree and help with the distribution of seeds throughout thejungle. As adults, they have no natural enemies.If captured during their first month of life before their wingshave matured, they make excellent (if expensive) pets. They mustconsume a great quantity of fruit to survive, eating on average100 gp worth of fruit each month (this cost might be reduced if alarge orchard is available). A skilled animal trainer can teach awinged serpent up to three tasks or tricks per point of intelli¬gence* which the creature will gladly perform (provided a supplyof fresh fruit is constantly at hand}, They can even be trained asguardians, although rogues have quickly discovered that unlessthey are extremely well-trained* they can be easily distracted by adecoy of aromatic, fresh fruit.Few useful by-products can be obtained from a winged ser¬pent, Their poison decomposes almost immediately after expo¬sure to air, and their hide is too thin and fragile to serve as goodleather. Their wings* however. If powdered and mixed with ink*can be used to inscribe a protection from lightning scroll.
Spectres are powerful undead that haunt the most desolate anddeserted of places. They hate all life and tight.Spectres appear as semitransparent beings and are often mis¬taken for haunts or ghosts. Unlike most undead, spectres retainthe semblance and manner of dress of their former life and can berecognized by old friends or through paintings of the personsthey used to be.Combat: Spectres exist primarily on the Negative Materia!plane and can therefore be attacked by beings on the Prime Mate¬rial plane only with magical weapons. Daylight makes spectrespowerless by weakening their ties to the Negative Material plane.The chilling touch of a spectre drains energy from living crea¬tures, A successful attack inflicts 1-8 points of damage and drainstwo life energy levels from the victim. Any being totally drained oflife energy by a spectre becomes a full-strength spectre under thecontrol of the spectre which drained him. The victim loses all con¬trol of his personality and may become more or less powerful thanbefore, depending on his level and class before becoming a spectre.Spectres are immune to all steep, charm, hold , and cold-basedspells, as well as poisons and paralyzation attacks. Holy waterinflicts 2-8 points of damage when it strikes a spectre. The watercan be splashed on a spectre successfully, A raise dead spell ap¬parently reverses the undead status, destroying the spectre imme¬diately if a saving throw versus spell is failed.Habitat Society: Most spectres are solitary, but some enclavesexist where a particularly powerful or lucky spectre has managedto drain mortals of life. This lead spectre is known as the masterspectre (always with maximum hit points per die), while the oth¬ers are known collectively as the followers. In this arrangement,the master spectre almost never engages enemies personally, butinstead sends his minions in for the kill. Mortals drained of life byfollower spectres are subservient to the master spectre, not thefollowers. Note that if the master spectre is slain, all followersbecome independent and can travel anywhere they wish in hopesof becoming master spectres themselves. Once a character be¬comes a spectre, recovery is nearly impossible, requiring a spe¬cial quest.Spectres hate light and all life, as both remind them of theirundead existence. They are therefore encountered only in placesof extreme darkness and desolation, like long-abandoned ruins,dungeons, and subterranean sewers.Contrary to popular mythology, spectres remain highly intelli¬gent and generally rational after the transformation to undeath.Life makes them lament their unlife, and they bear a strong ha¬tred for all those lucky enough to live and truly die.Spectres have enough cunning to plan their attacks, and rivalvampires in their skill at remaining hidden from the general pop¬ulace.Ecology: No one knows who the first spectre was or how itcame to be: the few facts detailed above are all that is knownwith any degree of certainty.
Androsphinxes are huge, winged mythological creatures with thebodies of male lions and man-fike facial features. They can speakthe languages of common and all sphinxes.Combat: The male, or andro-, sphinx is the most powerful ofthe sphinxes. Its huge paws can kill a normal man with just oneswipe* If brute force is not successful, an androsphinx can castspells as if a 6th-level priest. Note that most androsphinxes usethese spells for healing and defense rather than damage and at¬tack.The androsphinx has another special weapon as well—his bel¬lowing roar* It can roar three times per day, but must be veryangry to do- so. The first time an angry androsphinx roars, allcreatures within 360 yards must roll successful saving throws vs.wands or flee in panic for three turns. When an already angryandrosphinx is continually molested, even after bellowing once,it can roar even louder causing all creatures within 200 yards toroll successful saving throws vs. petrification or be paralyzedwith fright for ld4 rounds. In addition, any creatures within 30yards of this second roar are automatically deafened for 2d6rounds (unless they are deaf already or have protected hearingorgans). Any creature foolish enough to anger an androsphinxfurther will unleash his third and final roar with devastating ef¬fects, All creatures within 240 yards must successfully roll savingthrows vs. spell or lose 2d4 points of Strength for 2d4 rounds (use-1 point equals for characters with exceptionalStrength). In addition to the weakness effects, any creature with¬in 30 yards of the androsphinx is knocked over unless it is S feettall or larger. Creatures knocked over suffer 2dB points of dam¬age and must roll a successful saving throw vs. breath weapon toavoid being stunned tor 2d6 rounds. The force of this third roar isso powerful that stone within 30 yards cracks under the strain,unless it successfully saves vs. crushing blow,Habitat/Society; Androsphinxes are the most solitary of thesphinxes. They shun gynosphinxes because they are jealous ofthe higher intelligence of their female counterparts, and find theirneutral disposition a bit hard to deal with. However, most an-drosphinxes eventually succumb to the advances of a gynosphinxat least once in their lives.Ecology: What is strangest about androsphinxes is not theircombination lion/human appearance (as there are many suchcross-mutations found in the world), but their apparent lack ofpurpose. They arc by far the strongest of the sphinxes, but unliketheir counterparts, have no true pattern of behavior universal toall androsphinxes. They despise communicating with humansand hate riddles (mostjy because gynosphinxes love them somuch). It is therefore suggested by those knowledgeable in myth¬ological beasts and desert lore that androsphinxes are the guard¬ians of the sphinxes, evil (hieraco-), neutral (gyno- and crio-),and good (andro-b
Certainly, androsphinxes are the lifelong adversaries of thehieracosphinxes, but they almost always let the defeated enemygo free instead of finishing the kill (often with a roar or two at thefleeing sphinxes' behinds).In short, androsphinxes are free-roaming sphinxes sworn todefend other sphinxes against other races, namely men and theirilk. They have been known to bargain with men on occasion, butare the least greedy of the sphinxes, and are the only sphinxeslikely to take offense at such offerings if made by characters withlow Charismas or evil alignments,Criosphinxes have the bodies of winged lions, but they have theheads of rams. They are always male. They can speak their owndialect of sphinx, as well as that spoken by a ndro/gynosphinxesand the languages of animals.Combat? Criosphinxes attack with their two paws or with ahead butt with their ram s horns. Because they cast no spells andare not the brightest of sphinxes, their bargains with other beingsare limited to "safe passage or die." They love treasure and lustafter gy nosphinxes constantly. Plenty of wealth, or knowledge ofthe location of a gynosphinx's lair, is always enough for advertturers to avoid confrontation with criosphinxes.Habitat Society: Criosphinxes prize wealth and usually seek toextort passers-by for safe passage in exchange for a hefty bribe.They are sometimes found in packs of two or more, but only be¬cause all of these sphinxes are looking for the same gynosphinx.They often follow other criosphinxes, even if they have no ideawhether or not the leader really knows where he’s going. When anumber of criosphinxes find a gynosphinx, the first order of busi¬ness is to restrain their prey. Usually pushing boulders in front ofthe lair with their huge horns is sufficient. Then the criosphinxesbutt horns like rams, except these creatures do their fighting inthe air. The winner gets the prize.More often than not, however, criosphinxes begin their com¬bat immediately upon finding their quarry, and inevitably thevictor strides lorth to find the gynosphinx gone. While the crios-phinxes often find themselves richer for their trouble, as thegynosphinx rarely sees the need for material wealth while it isfleeing, it is only a poor reward indeed for their often decades-long quest.Ecology: Criosphinxes are obviously just further mutations ofthe already mysterious sphinx form. Their ability to speak withanimals seems to be an evolutionary necessity, as criosphinxesare particularly fond of warm wooded areas, often bordering onthe desert lands preferred by gynosphinxes.The gynosphinx is the female counterpart of the androsphinx,having a winged lion's body and human-like facial features.Gynosphinxes are not nearly as powerful as androsphinxes, butthey are much more knowledgeable* clever, and wise. Gynos-phinxes speak ail sphinx languages as well as common.Combat: Gynosphinxes can attack with two paws, but preferto bargain with their opponents. They help strangers only if theyare paid. They accept payment for services rendered or knowl¬edge and advice given, in the form of gems (preferred), jewelry,magic, or knowledge. Knowledge that would be of special inter¬est to a gynosphinx is the location of an androsphinx, but theyaccept fine prose, poetry lore, or a good riddle.If anyone breaks a bargain with a gynosphinx, he is subject toattack and the gynosphinx won t hesitate to devour the victim ifit wins the fight. The gynosphinx can cast the following spellsonce per day: detect magic, read magic, read languages , detectinvisibility, locate object * dispel 1 magic, c lair audience, clairvoy¬ance, remove curse * and legend lore . It can also use each symbolonce per week. Note that a gynosphinx is very intelligent and canuse these spells in many ways, if a bargaining group of adventur^ers steps back to discuss their plans among themselves, thegynosphinx will growl a little and cast claimudience to listen in.Habitat/Soriety: Gynosphinxes are solitary by nature, but notby choice. They spend most of their lives avoiding the advancesof criosphinxes (which they detest) and hieracosphinxes (whichthey fear), and searching high and low for an androsphinx.Gynosphinxes are intelligent enough to actively seek out ru¬ins and mystical places* like forgotten temples and such, whichthey immediately occupy. Using their many spells to learn asmuch as possible about the setting, they then wait for the nextgroup of travelers, pilgrims* or adventurers to come by andhope that they've encountered an androsphinx in their travelsor have spells or magical items that might be usable for justsuch a purpose.Ecology: Gynosphinxes own the dubious distinction of beingthe only female sphinx. A gynosphinx mated with an andros-phinx will produce another androsphinx or gynosphinx (evenchances for both). A gynosphinx mated with a criosphinx onlyproduces another male criosphinx, while mating with a hieracos-phinx produces similarly displeasing results.Fortunately gynosphinxes are much smarter than all of theircounterparts and can avoid otherwise compromising situationsthrough trickery and outright deceit. Unfortunately* they areamong the slowest of the sphinxes when flying or running, andthe lustful criosphinx and vicious hieracosphinx rarely give upthe chase once a gynosphinx has been located.Hier a cosphinxes are the only evil members of their breed. Theyhave the bodies of lions, but the wings and head of hawks. Theyare always males. They speak the languages of the other sphinx¬es, and some (Z0% ) also speak common.Combat: Hieracosphinxes do not cast spells* much like thecriosphinxes* but make up for their weaknesses with tenaciousevil and viciousness. Their paws and sharp beaks are deadly incombat, and they have been known to swoop down on victims.Habitat/Soriety: Hieracosphinxes live in hilly regions exclu¬sively, dwelling in caves overlooking the nearby deserts. Theydelight in evil and sometimes gather In bands of as many as six todo their vile business. Most often when a band of hieracos-phinxes is encountered, it is hot in pursuit of an androsphinx.which they hate with all of their beings. Only in numbers canthey hope to defeat so powerful an adversary, and these sphinxesnever believe in honor or playing fair. While it ts true that a vic¬torious androsphinx sometimes lets the defeated flee (in the vainhope that the battle may change the losers’ dispositions), a de¬feated androsphinx is always ripped to pieces when the hieracos¬phinxes are numerous enough and lucky enough to win the fight.Hieracosphiaxes also spend much of their time searching for agynosphinx to mate with, but prefer to kill an androsphinx andinhabit his lair until a gynosphinx eventually arrives (usually byfollowing old rumors and legends)* It is worthwhile to note thatthere are more hieracosphinxes than criosphinxes.Ecology: Hieracosphinxes are belligerent mutations of un¬known origin. It is believed that they were created by elder godsof evil merely to wreak havoc on the other, more pleasantsphinxes described above.Spiders are aggressive predators, dwelling both above and belowground. Most listed here are poisonous and bite prey first, be¬cause unconscious victims are easier to carry to a lair.Spiders have eight legs and eight eyes. They usually fit intotwo categories, web-spinners, which have bulbous abdomensand thin, sleek legs; and hunting spiders, which have smallerbodies, larger heads and fangs, and hairy bodies and legs.These are the vicious, black, hunting spiders that are found injungles, tombs, caverns, and throughout the Underdark. Thoughspin no webs, they can move readily In the webs of other spiders,and they are immune to all known spider venoms,Hairy spiders hunt in groups, swarming over victims to bite.Up to 40 hairy spiders can swarm a human-sized victim, and bitewith a + 5 bonus to attack rolls once they are attached. Hairyspiders are remarkably resistant to crushing damage; rolling orcrashing into walls is ineffective at removing or destroying hairyspiders. They must be individually struck or torn away.Hairy spiders are sometimes used as familiars, especially bydrow wizards. They can carry small items and walk on walls andceilings; they have 60-foot infravision and are not afraid of fire.Some (40% ) of these spiders can detect invisibility: they have a 4in 6 chance, once per round. These familiars are sometimes giventreasure by their masters.Victims receive a + 2 bonus to saving throws vs. the hairy spi¬ders 1 weak poison. It the saving throw fails, the victims AC andattack rolls are penalized by L and Dexterity is penalized by -3with respect to Dexterity checks. These effects begin one roundafter the bite and last for ld4 + l rounds.Large spiders are web-spinners that build strong, sticky webs,and often lurk nearby waiting for victims to get stuck while ex¬amining the beautiful constructions of their own spinning. A be¬ing with Strength 19 or more is unaffected by the webs. For eachpoint of Strength less than 19, it takes one round to break free ofthe webs (for example, a PC with Strength 15 can break free infour rounds). As many spiders as possible will attack the defense¬less victim during its struggle to free itself. Entangled characterscan be attacked with a +4 bonus to hit, and lose all Armor Classadjustments due to DexterityThe large spider's poison is Type A, the onset time is 15 min¬utes, Victims take 15 points of damage, or no damage if a savingthrow vs. poison (with a *2 to the roll! is successful.Huge spiders are hunting spiders that prefer to hide in camou¬flaged tunnels and holes and wait to leap as much as 30 feetthrough the air at unsuspecting victims. Their opponents suffer a^6 to surprise rolls when attacked in this manner.Huge spiders also posses Type A poison, with the same effectsas that of a targe spider. Victims receive a +1 to saving throwsvs. the poison of the huge spider.The watch spider is a specially bred, huge spider used as aguard animal in cellars, warehouses, and some drow homes. Ithas Low Intelligence (5-7) and can be trained to obey a master,not attack beings designated by the master, and to disable spell-casters. Their venom has an onset time of 1-2 rounds and causesparalysis for 2d4 turns, unless the victim makes a successful sav¬ing throw vs. poison (with a +1 on the roll). If starved for longperiods, they often eat paralyzed prey.Most giant spiders are simply much bigger versions of the web¬spinning large spiders. Their poison is Type F, which causes im¬mediate death if the victim fails the saving throw.The giant water spider is a small version (Moot diameter, 3 + 3HD) of the giant spider, It Jives in a burrow in a body of freshwater, and fills its burrow with bubbles of air. These spiders dragprey underwater to their lairs, where they can safely wrap it incocoons for later repasts. It is faster than a normal giant spider(movement rate 15), but cannot travel through webs. It is onlysemi-intelligent (2-4) anti has treasure as a huge spider; its bitecauses only ld4 damage plus poison.The Hying spider, sometimes just called a hunting spider ls agiant, winged, hunting spider. They are sometimes trained asguard animals, especially by the drow, They are 10 feet in diame¬ter and have 3+3 Hit Dice. Its normal movement rate is 9 , and itsgreat gossamer wings allow it to fly at the same rate (MG D),These spiders can also leap up to 70 feet, and fall any distancewithout harm upon landing, as long as they use their wings.Hunting spiders have Type A poison, just as a large spider, withthe same damage and saving throw adjustment.The giant trap door spider is a hunting spider which buildstunnels and surprises prey like a huge spider; it is brown or gold¬en, with red strips around its legs. On a successful attack roll, thespider can grab a victim and attempt to drag it into its lair, Avictim can get free by making a successful Strength check, with a-2 penalty, or be freed by companions, if their Strength totals 20or more. The victim can make no attacks,A giant trap door spider has 4 + 4 Hit Dice and causes 2d4 dam¬age per bite. Its poison causes an additional id6 points of damageif the victim fails a saving throw vs. poison. Though it does notbuild webs, it can travel through webs of other spiders, and it canshoot web strands up to 3 feet. The web strands require normalattack rolls to hit; they cause no damage, but entangle a victimfor ld4 rounds.The steeder is a giant hunting spider with tarantula markings,4 + 4 Hit Dice, and a movement rate of 12, It does not spin websand cannot move in them, but its feet exude a sticky substancewhich allows it to ding to precarious surfaces, even if only onefoot is touching the surface. The steeder also uses the secretions(50% of the time) to cling to prey; this requires an attack rollfrom the steeder, against AC 10 for the victim, adjusted only formagic and Dexterity. A victim can escape by making a successfulStrength or Dexterity roll with a *"10 penalty. While held, thevictim suffers a -2 penalty to attack and damage rolls and isautomatically bitten once per round.Duergar dwarves use steeders as mounts, fitting the spiderswith complex saddles and control straps. A steeder can leap 240feel, even with a rider Leaps are considered charging attacks, Asteeder moves on walls and ceilings at half its normal rate;duergar saddles are built for this kind of motion.Phase spiders are web-spinners with a raised thorax and ahuman-fike head; they are often confused with neogi or driders.They have a unique ability to phase m and out of the Prime mate¬rial plane They phase in, attack, and phase out, all in a singleround. This gives them a —3 modifier on initiative rolls; if aphase spider wins initiative by more than 4, it attacks and phasesout before its opponent has a chance to strike back. Then too, aphase spider usually phases into existence behind its chosen vic¬tim, so they get a + 4 modifier for attacking from behind. Phasespiders flee to the Ethereal plane when outmatched: there, theygain only a -1 modifier to initiative and can be attacked everyround, regardless of the initiative result.Phase spiders have Type F poison, and victims receive a “2penalty on saving throws against iLThis giant hunting spider is native to jungles, but has been intro¬duced into the Underdark by drow traders. It has a sleek, hairy,black body with brown stripes. Its legs have bony plates withsharp raised ridges that cut like sword blades.Against formidable prey, a sword spider leaps horizontally asfar as 30 feet, and lands legs forward, impaling its prey. Only oneattack roll is made for the creature. If the attack is successful, thevictim is struck by a number of legs based on its size; size S, threelegs; size M, four legs; size L, five legs; size H, six legs; size G, alteight legs. If the spiders leap is greater than 20 feet, each leg re¬ceives a +1 bonus to damage. Any upward attack against theleaping spider receives a -4 to the attack roll, due to the impal¬ing blades which protect the spider.The gargantuan spider, also called a whisper spider, is a huntingspider with red eyes, a black body and two gray stripes along itsabdomen. They usually live in huge webs in a forest or a cave,keeping treasure from prey in a small hole, or in the bole of atree. The whisper spider has 8 +8 Hit Dice. It can flatten itself tobecome S0% undetectable; it is so silent that opponents suffer a-5 penalty to surprise rolls*Using its webbing, it can make a false spider, a flapping ban¬ner, a filmy veil or any shape it has ever seen; it uses these tomislead prey, The spider can make a web net to trap prey or itcan shoot web strands up to 2 feet to bind a foe. Either attacktreats the spiders opponent as AC 10 and prevents the spiderfrom making a melee attack that round, A victim caught bywebbing is treated as if caught in a web spell. When bitten, avictim must make a successful saving throw vs. poison, with apenalty of “2, or fall into a coma for 2d4 turns.Giant marine spiders are gargantuan spiders with 7+7 HUDice, which live in burrows near bodies of saltwater. Like theirfreshwater cousins, they carry prey to their lairs; though theycollect no treasure, their lairs may contain inddental items fromvictims. They have type F poison, and do not share the whisperspider's special abilities.Sprites are shy and reclusive faerie people, related to other faerie-folk,like brownies and leprechauns. There are several varieties, includingpixies and nixies. Most have small. semitransparent wings, and elven fea¬tures.Normal sprites have distinctly elven features and live in meadows andwooded glens. The wingless sea sprites make their homes on colorful cor¬al reefs, living in harmony with the sea creatures, protecting the reefs'delicate environment, and frolicking in the waves. The naturally invisiblepixies are perhaps the most intelligent and mischievous of the iaeriesithey dwell in idyllic woodlands and delight in harassing travelers withtheir pranks. Nixies arc v/aler sprites (hat live in freshwater Jakes, and,while they harbor no grudges against humankind, they delight in enstav*ing men as their beasts of burden. Other sylvan creatures related tosprites include the swift atomies and the mischievous grigs, bath forest-dwellers.Combat: Sprites hate evil and ugliness, and are capable of stout militan¬cy, should their secluded homes be invaded by ores or worse. They lighlwith long, slim swords which do damage as a human-sized dagger, nrtheir own special bows. Bows have a range half that of a human shortbow and do only half as much damage {1-3 points!. The tips of their ar¬rows are coated with a special ointment concocted by ihe sprites. Anycreature struck by the drugged arrows, regardless of level, race, ur magicresistance, must make a saving throw vs. poison or fall into a deep sleeplasting Idb hours. Normally sprites do nothing more than take their vic¬tims to safe a place very far away [often confiscating their Weapons in theprocess), though evil creatures may be slain.Habitat Society: Sprites prefer to avoid other intelligent beings and live inplaces where they can have many celebrations, parties, and gatherings.They gather on most moonlit nights for singing and dancing, land spritesin the glens, and water sprites in the surf. Land sprites live in sylvanwoodlands, they monitor and protect forests and secluded glens. Watersprites protect their watery territories equally well.Most land-dwelling species of sprite are immortal and never die unlesskilled. The sprites' diminutive size and their dangerous environmentskeep sprite populations low.Sprites usually speak only their own language, common, and dven,but seem to get along with woodland mammals and other creatures any¬way. Humans otten mistake sprites for butterflies at a distance, and it isguessed that the majority of forest creatures also think of the fair spritesin this way.Combat: Sprites can become mrisibfe at will and detect good/evil within50 yards, so they are hard to deceive, evade, or capture. When invisible,sprites get +2 to attack rolls against opponents, who suffer a —4 penaltyto hit the sprites.Habitat'Society: Sprites are very flighty, and find even elves much tooserious about most woodland affairs.Only druids deal with sprites regularly. Some druids even receive a lit¬tle of their training in the company of a few sprites Most sprites lovedruids, for their neutral alignment and love for nature make them see theforest in much the same way. On rare occasions, sprites associate withrangers as wellSprites are loosely tribal, electing the best warrior among the group(male or female! as the group spokesperson. This leader is recognized asthe one who makes major decisions and bargains with druids and elves,Sprites rarely wait for their leader s decision, often attacking an evil crea¬ture before t he leader can issue any command.Ecology: Sprite sleep ointment is concocted from forest mushrooms, Theointment must be left to cure in the sun tor seven days. Sprites hollow outtree stumps to serve as containers for this rare substance.Sprites keep watch on their fellow sprites, so they know who to inviteto their frequent gatherings. A deserted meadow or glen is never emptyfor more than a decade before a new dan of sprites moves in.Sea sprites have fine, cheerful faces, with rounded cheeks and wide,tish-like eyes. Their hair is Ihe color and texture of seaweed and reachesdown to the gills on their necks, which enable sea sprites to breathe wateras well as air. Their skin is light blue, smooth, and slick. Sea sprites haveno wings, but webbing grows between their toes and fingers. Sea spriteswear bright, eel skin jerkins, and often adorn themselves with ornamentscrafted From treasures found in the ocean.Combat: About bah of the sea sprites encountered carry special cross¬bows. In ihe hands of sea sprites, these crossbows function like lightcrossbows above and below water. Sea sprites coat their crossbow boltsin sprite sleep ointment.Sea sprites hate and fear sahuagin, and kill those they put to sleep. Airbreathers are left on a nearby beach provided they have neither harmednor attempted to harm the coral reef.Sea sprites can turn invisible at u?ih and detect good/evil within 50yards. Three times per day, a sea sprite may cast slow, by touch, at the5th level of ability. Once per day, a sea sprite can cast airy water as a10th-level spelkaster.Sea sprites are 45% likely to be accompanied by Ido large carnivorousfish, such as barracudas. These fish act as guards and pets, attacking anycreature that threatens the sprites,HahitalSoriety; Sea sprites live in natural caves in coral reefs, or amidlarge wrecks. Though sea sprites can breathe air. they rarely set foot onland. Their homes are cheerfully decorated with a mishmash of seashelk,bones, pearls, free^wimming and colorful pet fish, and artifacts takenfrom sunken ships Sea sprites live in small communities of four or fivefamilies.While each community is led by the eldest male, the true poweroften rests in the hands of his mate.Ecology: Sea sprites eat seaweeds, small crustaceans, and fish. They raisefish and never deplete the reefs where they live. The only natural enemiesof sea sprites are sahuagm, Sea sprites usually live for several centuries.They sometimes trade with sea elves but never mix socially with them.Pixies stand about 2 1 ■'?. feet tall. When visible, they resemble smallelves, but with longer ears. Pixies have two silver wings, like those ofmoths. They wear bright clothing, often with a cap and a pair of shoeswith curled and pointed toes. Pixies speak their own language. Common,and the language of sprites.Combat: Pixies carry sprite-sized swords and bows. They use three typesof arrows, and shoot them with a +4 bonus to the attack roll. Besidesstandard sprite sleep-arrows, pixies use a war arrow* which inflictsld4+ 1 points of damage, and an arrow which does no physical harm tothe target. Those hit by this arrow must make a successful saving throwvs, spell, or suffer complete loss of memory which can be restored onlyby a heal or a limited wish.Pixies can, once per day, use each of the following magical powers, as ifthey were 8th-level mages polymorph self, know alignment , dispel mag¬ic. dancing lights , and ESP They can also do the following once per daybecome visible tor as long as they desire; creaLe illusions with both audialand visual components; and cause contusion by touch. Their illusionsrequire no concentration and last until magically dispelled. A creatureattacked with confusion must make a successful saving throw vs. spell, orsuffer its effects until a remove curse is applied. One pixie in 10 can useOff os /rresistih/e dance, also once per day.Because pixies are normally invisible, opponents suffer a ^4 penalty toattack rolls. A successful dispel magic against Bth-level magic makes anypixies, in its area of effect, visible for one round, then they automaticallybecome invisible again. They attack while invisible without penalty.Ha hit a t Society Pixies live in deep forest caves, dancing in moonlit gladesto the music of crickets and frogs. They are pranksters and they love tolead travelers astray. They use their illusion powers to accomplish this,hence the expression "pixie-led" for one who has lost his way. They like tofrighten maidens, rap on walls, blow out candles, and play in water.Pixies love to trick misers into giving away thdr treasure, especially byconvincing them that something horrible will happen to them If they donot. Pixies tarry no treasure, but sometimes have a hoard in thdr lair toimpress visitors* Pixies use treasure to taunt greedy people, and then playmerciless pranks on them until they abandon thdr search for the pixiesfortune. If the victim shows no greed and exhibits a good sense of humorabout their pranks, the pixies may allow that individual to choose oneitem from their hoard.Pixies dwell together in a community of dans or families that seem tomimic human customs Each family has a last name, and tamily and com¬munity loyalty is very important to pixies. Their life span is about 300years.Ecology: Pixies eat fruits and nectar. The most famous by-product ofpixies is pixie dust, also known as dusf of disappearance. Crushing 50pixie wings into a tine powder creates one dose of dust of disappeartmeeNaturally, pixies frown on lhis use of their wings.Nixies have webbed fingers and toes, pointed ears, and wide silvereyes. Most are slim and comely, and they have lightly scaled, pale greenskin and dark green hair. Females are attractive, often twining shells andpearl strings in their thick hair, and they modestly dress in tight-fittingwraps woven from colorful seaweeds. Males wear loincloths of the samematerials. Nixies can breathe both water and air; travel on land is possi¬ble, but they prefer not to leave their lakes. Nixies speak their own lan¬guage and the Common tongue.Combat: U one or more men approach within 30 feet of a group of nixies,the nixies pool their magic to create a powerful charm spell, one suchspell per every 10 nixies. The victim must make a saving throw vs. spell at-2 on the die roll. Before a charmed man enters the water, there is a 75 %chance that a dispel magk will break the charm. Once the victim is in thewater, the chance of dispelling the magic drops to 10% Nixies keep eachcharmed slave for one full year, forcing him to do all their heavy labor,but thereafter the charm wears off and the victim is set free. During thisenslavement, the nixies keep a witter breathing spell on the human cap¬tive. Nixies can cast this spell on any creature, nr dispel it r once per day;the spell's duration is one day.Male nixies carry daggers and javelins. The javelins are used to spearthings in the water, or can be thrown. A group of 10 nixies can use a largefishing net against adversaries who are in the water with them. Nixiesmake one net attack against AC 10 to ensnare a single man-sized crea¬ture, -2 AC for each additional victim, up to five total victims land AC0), Nixies sometimes employ guardian fish in battleEven with 25% magic resistance, nixies fear fire and very bright lights,so a flaming sword or a spell keeps them at bay. Nixies try to negatea coitfmuflJ %ltf spell by summoning small fish to crowd around the lightand dim it.HabitaUSociety: Nixie dwellings are woven from living seaweed and dif¬ficult to detect <5% chance within 20 feet, impossible from farther away).Nixies keep giant fish as guards, either 1-2 gar (20%) or 2-5 pike <80%);these ate taught to obey simple commands. Small bright, ornamental fishare kept as pels and trained to perform elaborate tricks. Trout, bass, andcatfish are herded as food. Nixies can also summon 10-100 small fishwhich takes 1-3 rounds,Nixie tribes have 20-80 members, about one third are youth. Familieshave 4-8 members, and the tribe usually includes 10-15 families, all re¬lated through common ancestors. A nixie tribe controls an area with aradius of 3-5 miles; when a tribe gets too large, 2-3 families split off toform a new tribe. Nixies live for several centuries.Nixie tribes are ruled by the Acquar (water mother), a hereditary posi¬tion held by a direct descendant of the original founding ancestor. She
decides major disputes and chooses the most apt warrior to he the S *a-quar. the warlord responsible for hunting and defense. The Acquar is ad¬vised by a council of elders, whose spokesperson is called the Luquar. thekeeper of the tribes oral history, Treasures, whether the spoils of war orthe results of work or luck, are divided equally by the Acquar* Intertribalrivalries are often Herce, and females are sometimes kidnapped as brides,for nixia- are polygamists, keeping 2-3 wives. Nixies worship water andnature powers.Ecology: Lakes with nixie tribes art kept clean and well stocked; often,human slaves work to improve the environment through the removal oftrash and obstructions. Nixie artifacts include jewelry of shells, pearfsand opals, silk from water spiders, and potions of water breathing.Atomies avoid most serious-minded creatures, but mix freely with grigs,and are 20% likely to be found in their company, The lightest and quick¬est of all the sprites, atomies are less than 1-toot lalL Atomies have fourdragonfly-like wings. Their features are eiven. their skin is pale with ahim of woodland green, Atomic clothing is innately magical, bright andfestive while at the same time blending with woodland surroundings.Atomies have twice the hearing range of humans, and they have infra-vision to ^0 feet, Their voices are high-pitched, almost a bee-like buzz.Atomies speak their own language and often the languages of sprites,pixies, and some broken Common, They can also speak with plants andanimats.Combat: Atomies attack as 3rd-level fighters. About 20% of atomies car¬ry tiny crossbows and spears. Atomic crossbows have a 3-foot range andinflict Id3 points of damage. Atomie spears cause id4 points of damage,The remaining atomics are armed with either spears (40% I or spriteswords (40 %}. Atomies have the following magical abilities, usable onceper round at Sth-level ability; Wink, riroisrbiJify, pass plant, speak withanimals and summon inserts*Atomie* are surprised only on a 1: opponents suffer a penalty tosurprise rolls. Upon hearing an intruder, atomies hide and try to make theintruder go away using false lights, clattering voices, and pesky, sum¬moned insects. Repeat intruders are warned with crossbow' bolts. If com¬bat is inevitable, or the intruders are ores, the atomies regroup andattack. Atomies with spears fly in and dive on surprised opponents (usu¬ally aiming at their posteriors). Diving attacks inflict double damage(244kHabitat Society: Atomies live in the upper branches of old hardwoodtrees (usually oaks), one family per tree. Each family hollows out a seriesof tiny rooms, decorating with walnut chairs, woven pine needle rugs,acorn dishes, and the like. A network of balconies, landings, and ropebridges connects the dwellings, forming a village high above the forestfloor. A typical atomie village house* 3d4 x 10 adults and 4db children.Atomies seldom bother with outsiders, even standard sprites (whomthey view as tedious and too serious), but they will sometimes help a lostchild, A rescued child is well cared for and entertained before being re¬turned to the outside world.The concept of pets is unknown, but atomies often grow mushroom■"friends" in their living rooms.Atomies have loose leadership, choosing a chieftain based on storytell¬ing and singing ability.Ecology; Atomies are herbivores and find the eating habits of their cous¬ins repulsive. They favor nuts above fruit, and prefer honey when theycan trick bees into giving them some.Atomies make a perfect, bite-sized morsels for most creatures, andsometimes lall prey to evil animals, such as worgs.Atomies view magic as a force connected with life and are fascinatedby inanimate magical items. Atomies collect magical items and displaythem in their home* or communities.. Nan-magical treasures are consid¬ered clutter and are either thrown away or given to forest creatures whovalue such things.A grig has the head, iorso. and arms of a sprite, with the wings, anten¬nae, and legs of a cricket. They can leap great distances. Grigs have lightblue skin, forest green hair, and brown hairy legs. They usually wear tu¬nics or brightly colored vests with buttons made from tiny gems. Grigsspeak atomie brownie, pixie, sprite, and Common. They have doublenormal hearing range and IfW-fbofc inf revision The origin of the grigsremains a mystery.Combat:Fierce (by sprite standards), each grig carries six small darts anda sprite sword. Grigs gain a f 2 bonus to attack rolls with darts. Dartsand swords do normal damage when used by grigs, but only 1 point ofdamage when used by non-grigs.Grig* have the following spell-tike abilities usable once per found at6th-Jeve! ability: change self, entangle, invisibility, pyrotechnics, trip,and ventriloquism. Grigs move silently in woodlands; they are surprisedonly on a 1* while opponents suffer a —6 penalty to surprise rolls. Somegrigs throw darts, while others leap to attack, and one grig fiddler (grigsnever go anywhere without a fiddle), plays a song with the same effect asOttos fmestsfib/e dance. All non-sprites within 30 feet of the fiddler mustmake a successful saving throw vs. spell or dance until the grig ceasesplaying* Grigs can play for hours*Habitat Society: Grigs roam the forests in small bands They have no per¬manent homes but often sleep in the limbs of treants, or near unicornsfwho protect grigs even unto death).Grigs are cautious but trusting. They delight in playing pranks on bigpeople Common ploys include stealing food, collapsing a tent, and usingventriloquism to make objects talk. Once a prank is set, the grigs sit backand watch, laughing at ihe unfortunate person. People who make Fools ofthemselves are apt to be plagued by harmless jokes until they reach thefores! edge. At that point, one ol the grigs comes out of hiding and makesamends with a gilt, either a harmless bauble such as a ld6* 100 gp gem(25%) or a precious jar of really fresh honey (75%)Grigs arc mischievous and lighthearted They have no fear of big peopleand take great joy in playing tricks upon them,Giant squids are huge varieties of the normal, peaceful, tentacledcephalopods (unshelled invertebrates).They have ten long tentacles, two of which are always used tomaintain stability when attacking or defending, and long, pro¬tected heads with two eyes. Their beak-like mouths are locatedwhere the tentacles meet the lower portion of their bodies.Combat: Giant squids prefer to grab their opponents in theirtentacles and constrict them, while they bring the thrashing vic¬tims into their huge jaws. As many as eight tentacles can attackone opponent , but only one at a time can constrict a man-sizedopponent (the rest are free to attack anything else within reach).The rubbery tentacles are so strong they cannot be broken byforce and must be severed. A giant squids tentacles hit for ld6points of damage and constrict for 2dt points of damage everyround after the initial strike. The beak of a giant squid inflicts 5d4points of damage.Any character vyho is constricted may have one arm {01-25%left, or 26-50% rightL no arms (51-75%), or both arms (76-100%) pinned, A constricted character cannot cast any spells,but he can grab a weapon and attack the tentacle (if only one armis free, he attacks with a -3 penalty to the attack roll; if both armsare free, the penalty is - 1 ). A giant squids tentacle requires 12points of damage from sharp or edged weapons to sever (these hitpoints are in addition to the hit points from Hit Dice),If a giant squid has four or more tentacles severed, the monsteris 80% likely to squirt out a cloud of jet-black ink 60 feet high by60 feet wide and 80 feet long. The squid then jets away and re¬treats to its lair. The ink completely obscures the vision of allwithin the cloud.A giant squid can drag ships of small size to the bottom andcan halt the movement of larger ones in one turn of dragging,After six or more tentacles have squeezed the hull of the ship forthree consecutive rounds, the vessel suffers damage as if it hadbeen rammed and it begins to take on water and sink.A kraken is a rare form of gargantuan squid. It is one of the mostdeadly monsters in existence.Combat: Krakens attack as huge varieties of giant squid. Two oftheir tentacles are barbed and cause 3d6 points of damage when theyhit. They then try to drag prey toward their gaping maws for a biteof 7d4 points of damage, The other six free tentacles inflict 2d6points of damage when they hit and constrict for 3 d 6 points eachround thereafter. A kraken's tentacle must suffer 18 points of dam¬age from shajp or edged weapons to be severed (these hit points arein addition to those the kraken gets from its Hit Dice).If three of more of its tentacles have been severed, the monsteris 80% likely to retreat , leaving behind a cloud of ink to discour¬age pursuit. The kraken is 50% likely to retreat to its den if fouror more of its tentacles have victims. It leaves behind an inkcloud in this case also. The ink cloud of a kraken is 80 feet highby 80 feet wide by 120 feet long and is poisonous (it dissipates in2-5 rounds). Those within the cloud receive 2d4 points of damageevery round they remain. Krakens jet away to their lairs at amovement rate 21 .Krakens can drag ships oF 60 feet long down in the same way asnormal giant squids attack. They have the innate power to causeairy water in a sphere 120 yards across or in a hemisphere 240 yardsacross (they can do this continuously ). They can employ the follow¬ing spell-like powers, one at a time, at will: faerie fire for up to eighthours, control temperature in a 40-yard radius continuously controlwinds once per day weather summoning once per day and artimalsummoning HI (fish only) three times per day (note that this spelldoes not grant control of the fish once summoned).Krakens are not affected by the conch horns of tritons.Habitat Society; Krakens have Intelligences of genius or higherand often control entire regions of the underwater world. Theirlairs lie thousands of feet below the surface and they maintainhuge complexes of caverns where they keep and breed humanslaves to serve and feed them.Ecology; Krakens can breathe either air or water and are ag¬gressive hunters. Many tropical islands have been completelystripped of all inhabitants (animal and human) by krakens.It is said that krakens retreated to the depths w T hen the forces ofgood thwarted their attempt to rule the seas, but it is also saidthat in the future krakens will rise again.
Stirges are bird-like creatures that drink the blood of their vic¬tims for sustenance. They have four small, pincer-Uke legs thatthey use to clamp onto the necks of their victims. They are rusty-red to reddish brown in colon and their eyes and feet are yellow¬ish* The dangling proboscises of stirges are pink at the tip, fadingto gray at the base (near their heads).Combat: Due to an instinctive ability to find and attack weakpoints, stirges attack as 4-Hit Die creatures, rather than 1 + 1.Their long proboscis inflicts 1-3 points of damage when it hits,and drains ld4 points of blood every round thereafter. When astirge drains a total of 12 points of blood from a victim, it be¬comes bloated and flies off to digest its protein-rich meal.Stirges must be killed to be removed, due to their strong grip.If an attack against an attached stirge misses, make another at¬tack roll against the victim's Armor Class to see if the attack hitsthe victim instead. Caution is advisable when attempting to re¬move an attached stirge.Habitat,Society: Stirges form nest-like colonies in attics,dungeons, and copses of trees* Although they resemble birds,they hang upside down when sleeping, indicating that stirgesmay be closely related to vampire bats,Stirges can breed in captivity, but a constant supply of blood isneeded. Stirges mostly kill lowdevel humans, animals and chil¬dren, so the arrival of these predators in any civilized territory isalways a cause for alarm. Fortunately even a low-levd group ofadventurers or town militia is usually capable of ending the men¬ace with little or no loss of life.Ecology: Stirges have an acute sense of smell, can see m the dark,and can sense heat sources within 200 feet* These senses keepstirges informed when living creatures enter their habitat. Crea¬tures with a natural AC of 3 or better are usually immune to astirge's blood draining attack, since their hides are too thick topenetrate. As a consequence, huge nests of stirges live symbioti-cally with some evil dragons. Characters who protect their entirebodies with special leather or better armor (this special armorcosts two to three times more than normal armor) can safely ap¬proach a stirge, Even the slightest gap in the protection is seenand smelled by the creature, and a successful attack roll meansthe creature has broken through the weakness and locked on.After a stirge has gorged itself by draining blood, it sleeps forone day, plus one day for every 2 points of blood it drank (themaximum sleep period is after drinking 12 points of blood—seven days). During this period of rest, silent attackers can im¬pose a —2 penalty to the stirges' surprise roll* as the beasts wakeslowly and remain drowsy for a few moments. They are mostvulnerable at this time. While certain species of stirges prefer todine on human blood, most are content with any large mammal,like cows, moose, and deer. Experienced druids and rangers usu¬ally recognize the traces of a stirge colony by the occurrences ofmysteriously drained and dead animals in the vicinity*A stirge colony's territory extends for only a mile in diameter,so stirges move around a lot after they've drained a region of theavailable blood. Often, the presence of stirges is only discoveredlong after the colony has departed, making it very difficult totrack them,There are rumored to be exceptionally large varieties of stirgesdeep in the densest tropical jungles. Though they are only 2+2Hit Die creatures, they attack as 8 Hit Die monsters* Purportedly,they have a paralyzing poison in the tips of their sharp snoutsthat is highly prized by local tribesmen. Jungle stirges have beenknown to mingle with giant vampire bats. None of these largerversions have ever been captured or examined by sages, so noth¬ing else is known about their strengths or weaknesses. What littleof them is known came from the cannibals and head hunters ofthe jungle regions*
Su-monsters look like big gray monkeys, 4 to 5 feet talk Theyhave large bones and muscular limbs, but they always appear abit underfed, because their ribs and vertebrae show prominently.Their long, prehensile tails can easily support their weight. Theirhands and feet are virtually alike, each having three long, thickfingers and an opposable thumb, all equipped with claws. Likethe tail, their hands and feet are very strong, allowing them tohang by one limb for several hours. Short, dirty gray fur coversmost of their body. Their face and tail are black, while their pawsare always bloody red (making them look like they just finishedkilling something, which is the case more often than not). Theyfrequently grin, but this is usually a sharp-toothed threat ratherthan a gesture of friendliness.Com bah Su-monsters attack with all four legs when possible,raking their extremely sharp nails across their victim. They canalso deliver a powerful bite with their canine-like mouth, Thesecreatures like to hunt in small packs (ld !2 members). Their fa¬vorite hunting grounds are well-traveled trails through thejungle/forest. They search for a sturdy branch overhanging atrail, and perch in the trees, waiting patiently. When a victimpasses beneath them, they an swing down, using their tails as an¬chors, This way they can attack with all four claws plus the bite.Victims of this kind of ambush suffer a =*4 penalty to their sur¬prise rolls.What really makes these beasts ferocious is their tribal protec¬tiveness. Half the time (50% chancel the entire family takes partin the hunt; male, female, and two young. If the young are at¬tacked or threatened, the females fight as if under a haste spell(Le., double movement and number of attacks). Likewise, if thethey females are attacked, the males appear to fight with haste. Asurge of adrenaline accounts for this ferocity. Females can main¬tain the effect for up to 6 turns (an hour), and males can maintainit for up to 4 turns, Psionically these creatures can be deadly.They know three attack modes. They are also impervious to tele¬pathic attacks. When su-monsters are using enhancement, theycan attack both psionically and physically if they choose (insteadof a double attack rate).Su-monsters always know the following powers, and there is a10 % chance that they will have one more science and two moredevotions in the psychometabolk discipline.% Psycho met a holism - Devotions; enhancement (no cost, seeabove),% Metapsionics - Devotions; psionic sense (always on, no cost) „% Telepathy - Sciences: psychic crush, Devotions; mind thrust,psionic blast.Habitat Society A su-monster family is composed of two parents(adult male and female) and two young. When two or more fami¬lies live together, they form a clan, Su-monsters are very territo¬rial and have a particular hatred for the psionically empowered.According to legend, su-monsters were created by a powerfulevil cleric or mage, who wished to guard his forest from intruders(especially psionic ones), The creatures do make a formidable at¬tack force, which tends to support this theory, According tosome sages the creatures are magical hybrid of humanoids andapes. In any event, many evil wizards and priests employ su-monsters as forest guards today.Ecology: Su-monsters keep their valuables well hidden in thehigh boles of the trees in their territory. They have no food value,since their meat is mildly poisonous. Characters who eat su-monster meat must save vs. poison or become ill, and no naturalhealing is possible for 1 week.
Swanmays* are human females who can assume swan form. In humanform, swanmays are indistinguishable from other people. They nor¬mally wear light armor and carry rangers" gear, as well as a sword,dagger, bow, and arrows. These items are unaffected by a swanmay'$shapeshiHingr so they must be hidden. Swanmays may be recognizedby a feather token, feathered garment, or signet ring. Such items aretransformed into part of the swans plumage or worn on a leg.Combat: In human form, the swanmay functions as a ranger. To de¬termine the level and Hii Dice of a swanmay, 2db are rolled. She at¬tacks with whatever weapons she possesses.In swan form, a swanmay is harmed only by +1 or better weap¬ons. She attacks with buffeting wings, a flying leap, and a bite,HabilabSoeiety: Swanmays arc members of a special sorority of ly-canthrope rangers. Unlike other lycanlhropes, their shapeshiftingability is gained voluntarily from a special token: a feather token, afeather garment. or a signet ring. Such items reveal their magical au¬ras when exposed to a detect magic spell Without the item, she isforced to remain in her current form. Tokens only function for swan-mays.Swanmays are extremely secretive about their sorority, Qnly hu¬man women are admitted: the other requirements are unknown. It issuspected that women are invited to join when they unknowinglyperform a great service for another swanmay If a PC Is invited tojoin, it is 50% likely that she will retire from casual adventuring todevote herself full time to her new responsibilities.Swanmays art guided by their swan personalities, They dislikenoisy, brash creatures, ferocious beasts, and anything of an evilalignment They are friendly with forest folk, such as sylvan elvesand dryads. They tend to avoid normal humanoids. Only naturepriests are known to regularly associate with swanmays; such alli¬ances are generally initiated by swanmays when they need helpagainst a common evil.Swanmays build communal lodgings near bodies of water, deep inthe forest Such lodgings are lightly fortified against land attack.They usually contain two means of escape — a secret tunnel to thelake and a ceiling hatch, Swanmays in swan form can use eitherroute Swanmay lodgings may be recognized by the number of wa¬terfowl living nearby- The remains of poachers may also be left hereas a warning to others.Ecology; Swanmays are independent protectors of the forests andwildlife. They actively oppose evil races or monsters that mightotherwise decimate wildlife and the countryside. They protect swansmore out of sympathy for their similarity than out of any kinship.In the mountains and cool valleys of the lands of Zakhara lives a raceof bird maidens, related to the swanmays. Just like their sisters, theydepend on a token to change forms: a colorful shawl or veil ol feath¬ers, They can assume many bird shapes, including falcons, swallows,parrots, and even fat 8th level) giant eagles.Though they have no sorority bird maidens are loosely united bytheir faith. All bird maidens are kahina, idol priestesses who believe inthe divinity of all things. They live as wandering teachers, protecting theland from those who despoil it. They get along best with those who re¬spect the land: desert riders, mystics, and fisherfolk. In the fertile rivervalleys, they preach the faith and maintain the fertility of the land andlivestock. Some tribesmen believe bird maidens are hama t spirits of thedeparted, who return to help the living. Bird maidens deny this and maycut themselves to prove that they are flesh and bloodBird maidens 1 Hit Dice are equal to their priestly level from 2-8.They have major access to the All Animal. Divination, ElementalHealing, Plant and Weather spheres and minor access to the Crea¬tion. Protection, and Sun spheres. They carry spears, darts, andslings, but may not wear armor or shields (even magical) heavierthan hide. If they do, they cannot use spells. Bird maidens cannotturn undead.In bird form, bird maidens can peck and claw, but most don’t fight asbirds. Only a bird maiden's shawl or veil changes with her when sheshifts form. All other equipment is unchanged and must be hidden orcared for by others until the bird maiden again changes her form.Bird maidens are sometimes forced to many men who steal theirshawls: if they ever recover them, they leave their husbands, killing theirsons and taking the daughters with them to become bird maidens. If thefeathered garment is destroyed, the bird maiden dies as wellRumors tell of a great wooden fortress among the clouds of thehigh hills, called the Crown of All Feathers, where young bird maid¬ens are taught the rituals and duties of kahinas by the aaracockra.
Tabaxi have spotted coats ranging in color from light yellow tobrownish red. These graceful feline humanoids are tall and slender,with retractable claws, and eyes of green or yellow.Some tabaxi have solid spots and are also called leopard men; theypronounce their name ta-BAX-ee. Tabaxi in other regions have rose¬ate spots, are called jaguar men, and pronounce their race's nametah-BAHSH-w.Combat; Tabaxi are great hunters, combining quick, stealthy move¬ments with natural camouflage to surprise prey. Enemies suffer a - 2penalty to surprise rolls, Tabaxi are clever and organized, often driv¬ing prey into an ambush (though some play with prey before killingit}* Tabaxi climb and swim, and can use those abilities in combat,Because of their cleverness and acute sense of smell, tabaxis are al¬most impassible to trap.Tabaxi often use weapons of wood, bone, and stone, including bo-las, slings, obsidian studded dubs (treat as battle axes), and faveJmswith atlatl. They are as likely to use claws and teeth as any otherweapon. If both forepaws hit, a tabaxi rakes with its rear daws* Agroup encountered in the wild will include a Hunt Leader with maxi¬mum hit points, and may 150% chance? indude a 3rd-ievel priestwith appropriate Hit Dice and spells,Ha hi flit Society: Tabaxi dans contain equal numbers of males and fe¬males, and a full dan has Ido+ 1 Hunts of 2d4 tabaxi. The Huntswork the area around the clan lair. Some lairs are temporary, butmost are small villages of ramadas (huts with grass roofs supportedby tall poles, and no walls). In a lair, 3d4 young with 1 HD each willbe found. An elder with 4 HD leads the dan, and 50% of the leadersare aided by a Sthdevel shaman. A clan has a 10% chance of owingallegiance to a tabaxi lord; these darts tend toward evil, warlikeways, and their shamans worship evil powers* Shamans ol otherclans worship powers related to sunlight, rain, or animals.Tabaxi are reclusive and avoid other intelligent beings, even othertabaxi dans They do not engage in trade, which they consider de¬meaning, but some few have agents who trade for them. Tabaxispeak their own ancient language* Legends tell of a great tabaxi civili¬zation that was supplanted by other races,Ecology: Tabaxi have few natural enemies. For food, they prefer theboar-like peccaries and huge rodents called eapybaras; only a verydegenerate dan attacks members of another intelligent species forFood. Tabaxi are sometimes hunted for their pelts, worth up to 250 gpeach. Their skins and daws are also useful in some types of naturalmagic,A tabaxi lord appears as a huge jaguar or leopard, depending onwhere it is found. They are intelligent, malicious, and cunning. Theyspeak tabaxi and languages commonly used by nearby societies. Theantithesis of couatls, tabaxi lords hate them (the feeling is mutual)and attack couati on sight.Tabaxi lords use trickery, ambush, allies, and spells to weaken foesbefore dosing for combat* Some 55% are 7th-level wizards, while40% are 7th-it?vel priests of a dark power known as Zaltec, Five per¬cent are both wizard and priest. Wizard spells are chosen from theschools of illusion, enchantment/charm, or necromancy; spells fromthe schools of alteration and invocation/evocation are never used. Inaddition to spells that require only verbal components, they can usethe following powers at will: defect gpod/evit, detect invisibility,bind t and hypnotism. The bravest and cruelest tabaxi lords can usedimension door three times per day.Tabaxi lords are closely related to tabaxi, perhaps a cursed version.All tabaxi lords are male and must lake a tabaxi mate to produceoffspring (always a male tabaxi lord). Although usually solitary, atabaxi lord sometimes takes leadership of a rabaxt dan for the pur¬pose of mating and insuring offspring. Some choose to stay with theclan even after the offspring is bom and sent off to make Its way inthe jungle*
The tako are a race of intelligent octopi who can move onto landand use weapons and other tools.Tako have no bones; their plump bodies are protected bytough mantles of leathery skin. They have eight supple tentacles,,similar to those of octopi, lined with circular muscles that act assuction cups. They have a single golden eye centered in theirheads, and sharp, protruding jaws that resemble the bill of a par¬rot. Although tako can change color with ease, a mature male'snormal color is light green, while a mature females is orange-red.Young tako appear in a variety of colors, including black, brown,white, blue r and golden,Tako have their own language based on tentacle movementsand skin-color changes. Characters with an Intelligence of atleast 17 {or with the reading/writing proficiency) have a 25%chance ot understanding the tako's language.Combat: Though normally docile, tako attack any creature whoinvades their territory. In addition, they have a strong sense ofhonor, and will avenge attacks and ally with members of otherraces who assist them. They are crafty opponents. Tako canchange their color and pattern to match any natural terrain in asingle round. This camouflage makes them 90% undetectable,and modifies the surprise rolls of opponents by -3.Most tako war parties are exclusively male. The tako attackwith their beaks. They also can anchor themselves with a singletentacle, leaving the remaining seven tentacles free to make at¬tacks. Usually the tako carry seven weapons—one spear or handaxe in each free tentacle,Tako can make constriction attacks similar to octopi. Any vic¬tim under 7 feet tall for 7 feet long) can be grappled by one tenta¬cle at a time. Male tako have a 10% chance of pinning both of thevictims arms with a single strike; females have a 15% chance.The chance ot pinning only one upper limb is the same. If bothlimbs are pinned, the victim has no attack. If only one limb ispinned, the victim attacks with a *3 penalty to his attack roll. Ifno limbs are pinned, the victim attacks with a —1 penalty.Tako tentacles grip with a Strength of 1S/QG; a victim with aStrength equal to or greater than 18/OG can grasp the tentacle andloosen it, negating the constriction. To break completely free, atentacle must be severed; males have 4 hit points per tentacle,females have 6 hit points per tentacle. Unless loosened or sev¬ered, tentacle constriction automatically inflicts 1-4 hit points ofdamage per round from males, or 2-8 (2d4) points from females,Young tako cannot perform constriction attacks. Their AC is7, and they have 1 HD. Their THACO is 20. They inflict 0-1 hp ofdamage per tentacle attack, and 1*3 hp with their beak, Other¬wise, they're just small, feisty versions of their parents, with anMR of 1 (5w3) and XP value of 35.Habitat-Society: A tako tribe comprises 3-12 (3d4) males, half asmany young, and 1-2 females. Females make all decisions for thetribe, while the males act as defenders and hunters, The creaturesestablish their lairs in coastal underwater caves, making occa¬sional raids on land for food, weapons, and treasure items. Insome areas, tako coexist with humans, cooperating to attack seamonsters and to help fishermen, but such cases are extremelyrare.Ecology: Tako cat oysters, crabs, lobsters, and other shell fish,which they crack open with their powerful jaws. They can ejectsmall clouds of rich blue ink, but the clouds are too limited toserve as a defense. Humans greatly prize the ink, however, anduse it to create calligraphy.
TanarVi are, in the broadest terms, chaos and evil defined. Theless intelligent often attack without question and fight until slain.True and greater tanar'ri often roam the Astral and EtherealPlanes—their attention is attracted by those in an ethereal state.Combat: In addition to the separate abilities of each sort oftanariri, they ail share the following magical powers:T greater tanar ri suffer half damage from silver weapons,All tanarri with average or above average intelligence have aform ok telepathy that enables them to communicate with anyintelligent life form, regardless of any language barriers.Frequently, the Abyss-forged, magical weapons of the tanar ridissolve upon the death of the creature. When one doesn’t, it islikely that the weapon in question originated somewhere else.Habitat/Sodety: There are five dasstficalions of tanar ri, listed inascending order of power, and with species, below:True: balor, glabrezu, hezrou, marilith, nalfeshnec, vrockGuardian: molvdeusBalor True Tanar'ri): The greatest and most terrible of the truetanarVi , the balors are the undisputed terrors of the Abyss. Theyare the very motivation behind the tanarri involvement in theBlood War. In every sense of the word, balors are the quintessen¬tial tanar ri. They derive great pleasure from the suffering of oth¬ers and go out of their way to torment lesser beings and causethem pain.Balors are repulsive and loathsome to behold. They are tower¬ing humanoids with deep, dark red skin. They have huge wingslhai propel them with unnatural speed and agility, They havelong, wicked claws and grotesque fangs that drip with venom.Balors are commonly surrounded by searing flames.Combat: Balors attack with their great fists for 2-12 points ofdamage. Anyone struck by a baloris fists must roll a savingthrow vs. spells with a ~t penalty or flee in terror for 1-6 turnsBalors much prefer weapons to fists in combat. Each carries agreat sword that looks like a bolt of lightning. In the hands of abalor these swords are vorpal and can detect evil/good in a 30foot radius. Any creature that picks up a balors sword, regard¬less ot whether its skin acLuallv touches it, immediately suffers10-60 points of damage and must roll a saving throw vs. spells, ordie immediately.Balors also use a great whip with many tails. These whips willinflict but 1-4 points of damage per hit. However, they magicallywrap the victim, allowing the balor to draw the victim into hisever-present bodily flames. Once dragged into the flames, thevictim suffers 4-24 points of damage per round. Escaping thewhip requires a successful one-half strength check. When thewhip holds a victim, it cannot be used in other attacks.Balors may use one of the following additional magical powersat the 20 th level of spell use per round at will: detect invisibility(always active), defect magic (always active}, dispel magic, fearpyrotechnics, read magic suggestion, symbol (any type) teleki¬nesis, and tongues.They may also gate 1-8 least, 1-6 lesser, 1-4 greater, or 1 truetanar’ri to thdr location. The gate is always successful but mayonly be used once per hour.Balors are completely immune to gas. If a balor is slain in theAbyss, it explodes in a blinding flash of light, inflicting 50 pointsof damage to everything in a 300-foot radius around the creature(saving throw vs. spell for half damage).
Habitat/Society: Balors exist for one purpose only: to wage theBlood War They are driven by the strongest primal desire tofight and will command whole legions of beings into battle,Balors also recognize a subtle but important aspect of the War:the prime material plane. They will often make pacts with mor¬tals to perform services for the purpose of gaining power in theprime material plane, Balors know that the more followers or al¬lies they can gain in the prime material, the more power they willhave there.There are at least 24 balors known to exist. The creatures donot inhabit any particular area of the Abyss, but wander aboutforming armies for battle with the baatezu (q.v J,Ecology: There is nothing more important in the Abyss than theBlood War. The balor r in a sense, are the Blood War from atanarVi perspective, the ecology of the Abyss, driving the crea¬tion of new beings and mandating their survival.Marilith iTrue Tanaririi: Bold and cunning, marilith are the gen¬erals and tacticians for the Blood War. Where the balors are theinfluence and energy behind the war effort, the marilith are thebrains and tactics.Terrible to behold, these creatures have the bodies of giantsnakes, with huge, green, scaly coils. From the waist up, they arebeautiful, comely females. Besides her obvious snake body thefeature that reveals the true nature of this tanar Vi is her six arms.They are commonly adorned with precious jewelry and highlydecorated weapons—marilith most often carry a different weap¬on in each of their six hands.Combat: Although marilith are strategists and tacticians, theylove to join combat and do so whenever the opportunity presentsitself. They can attack with each of their six arms and constrict avictim with their snaky tails as well,Marilith always carry a different weapon in each hand, favor¬ing exotic swords and axes. The DM should assign specific weap¬ons: 90% of them should be enchanted versions of the commonvariety, and 15% of those should be a special weapon, Marilithfavor their weapons highly If one should ever be lost or stolen,marilith go to great lengths to see that the weapon is recovered,A marilith can also constrict with her deadly tail. If the tail hitsin combat, it wraps around a victim, automatically inflicting 4-24 points of crushing damage each round. Additionally due tothe constriction of air, the victim must roll a successful Constitu¬tion check every round or fall unconscious. No opponent withless than a IS Strength score can even hope to break free of themariiitb's toils. There is a 10% chance per round, per point ofStrength over 14, that the victim can escape. Marilith have thefollowing additional magical powers that they can use once perround, one at a time, at will; animate dead, cause seriouswounds, cloudkilh comprehend languages, curse, detect evil de¬tect magic, detect invisibility, polymorph self (7 times per day),project image pyrotechnics , and telekinesis.They may also attempt to gate in 2-20 least tanar ri, l-o lessertanariri, 1-4 greater tanar ri. or 1 true tanar ri once per hour witha 35% chance of success.Weapons of 4 1 or less magical enchantment cannot harm amarilith. These creatures are never surprised. They cannot befooled by illusions and are immune to mind-affecting spells.Habitat Society: As noted, marilith are the strategists of theBlood War. They are in charge of devising ail tactics to be usedduring the battles and coordinate the activities of all true tanar ri(save the mighty balors, of course}* Due to the chaotic nature ofthe tanar ri, it is not really possible to coordinate their activities,but the marilith are charged with it, nonetheless.These stunningly powerful creatures have a hatred for the gla-brezu. They feel that the subtle warfare of the glabrezu is a chil¬drens game and inferior to proper warfare. A marilith willattempt to discredit the workings of the glabrezu any chance itgets. They would completely destroy the subtle beasts, but the allpowerful balors favor the giabrezus' tactics and would have themcontinue their ways.Ecology: Marilith are true tanar ri, which makes them a part ofthe driving force behind the Blood War. Moreover, they are thecoordinators and generals of the war effort. Marilith feel thatthey are the true force behind the war. Secretly, they feel that thebalors have their place only because of their great power, but arenot absolutely necessary. They may be right in their belief, butthe power of the balors remains unchallenged.The legendary tarrasque. For there is Fortunately only one knownto exist, is the most dreaded monster native to the Prime Materialplane, The creature is a scaly biped with two horns on its head, alashing tail, and a reflective carapace.1-12/1-12/ 2-24/5-50/ MO/1-10Sharpness bite r terrorSee belowNilCombat: The tarrasque is a killing machine and when active(see below) eats everything for miles around, including all ani¬mals and vegetation. Normal attacks are with its two forelimbdaws (ld!2 points of damage each), a sweeping tail lash (2dl2points of damage), a savage bite (5d10 points of damage plus actsas a sword ofsharpness, severing a limb on a natural attack rollof 18 or better) and two thrusting hom attacks (ldlQ points ofdamage each),Once every turn, the normally slow-moving tarrasque canrush forward at a movement rate of 15, making all hom attackscause double damage and trampling anything underfoot for 4dI0points of crushing damage.The mere sight of the tarrasque causes creatures with less than3 levels or Hit Dice to be paralyzed with Fright (no saving throw)until it is out of their vision. Creatures of 3 or more levels or HitDice flee in panic, although those of 7 or more levels or Hit Dicethat manage to succeed with a saving throw vs. paralyzation arenot affected (though they often still decide to run away).The tarrasque's carapace is exceptionally tough and highly re¬flective. Bolts and rays such as lightning bolts, cones of cold, andeven magic missiles are useless against it. The reflection is suchthat 1 in 6 of these attacks actually bounces directly back at lhecaster (affecting him normally), while the rest bounce off harm¬lessly to the sides and into the air.The tarrasque is also immune to all heat and fire, and it regen¬erates lost hit points at a rate of 1 hit point per round. Only en¬chanted weapons ( + 1 or better) have any hope of harming thetarrasque. The Tarrasque is totally immune to ail psionics.Habitat/Society: It is fortunate that the tarrasque is active onlyfor short periods of time. Typically, the monster comes forth toforage for a week or two, ravaging the countryside for milesaround. The tarrasque then seeks a hidden lair underground andlies dormant, sleeping for 5d4 months before coming forth again.Once every decade or so, the monster is particularly active, stay¬ing awake for several months. Thereafter its period of dormancyis 4d4 years unless disturbed. The ratio of active to dormantstates seems to be about I;3Q.Ecology: Slaying of the tarrasque is said to be possible only iithe monster xs reduced io -30 or fewer hit points and a wish isthen used. Otherwise, even the slightest piece of the Larrasquecart regenerate and restore the monster completely. Legend saysthat a great treasure can be extracted iroirt the tarrasque s cara¬pace. The upper portion, treated with add and then heated in afurnace, is thought to yield gems (lOdlO diamonds of 1,000 gpbase value each). The underbelly material, mixed with the crea¬ture's blood and adamantite, is said to produce a metal that canbe forged by master dwarven blacksmiths into ld4 shields of +5enchantment. It Lakes two years to manufacture each shield, andthe dwarves aren't likely to do it for free.It is hoped that the tarrasque is a solitary creation, some hid¬eous abomination unleashed by the dark arts or by elderforgotten gods to punish all of nature. The elemental nature ofthe tarrasque leads the few living tarrasque experts to speculatethat the elemental princes of evil have something to do with itsexistence. In any case, the location of the tarrasque remains amystery, as it rarely leaves witnesses in its w r ake, and naturequickly grows over all remnants of its presence. It is rumoredthat the tarrasque is responsible for the extinction of one ancientcivilization, for the records of their last days spoke of a "greatreptilian punisher sent by the gods to end the world."Note: Creatures with a minus THAC0 can only be hit on a 1.
Tasloi are long-legged, flat-headed humanoids. They walk in acrouching posture, touching their knuckles to the ground fromtime to time. Their skins are a lustrous green and are thinly cov-ered with coarse black hair. Their eyes are similar to a cat s andare gold in color.Often they can be heard at night, speaking in their high, whis-pery voices. Tasloi speak their own tongue and can also speak thelanguages of monkeys and apes. About 5% of their kind havelearned a pidgin common that they use when trading.Combat: Tasloi like to hide in tree tops and drop down on theweak and unwary. They are quick and nimble in Lhe trees, butslow and clumsy on the ground. When they are in jungle, theirstealthy movements impose a -4 penalty to opponents' surpriseroils. They also hide in shadows, like a thief, with 75% effective¬ness, Their infra vision enables them to see up to 90 feet in dark¬ness, but they hate daylight and suffer a -1 penalty to their attackroll when fighting in broad daylight.Tasloi carry the following weapons: small shield (AC 5) andjavelin—20 %. club and javelin—40% r short sword and smallshield iAC 5)—10% f javelin and net—15%, short sword andnet—10% or javelin and lasso— 5%. Tasloi without shields areAC 6. They customarily carry all javelins and shields on theirbacks when they travel through the trees.Tasloi eat anything, but they enjoy all kinds of flesh, especiallyhumans and elves. They normally attack from above, trying tocapture if possible. If they gain surprise, they use their 10-foot-djameter nets to trap their prey (the nets totally entangle those ofless than 15 Strength: those of 15 or greater Strength need a suc¬cessful open doors roll to rip the net and escape). If a party is toovigilant or prepared, the tasloi attempt to wear down the groupthrough short, sudden attacks followed by retreat. If possible,tasloi try to steal the enemy s dead after an attack.Habitat/Sodety: The tasloi live in looseiy-struetured bands ofseveral families. In every band of 70 or more, there is a chief of 5Hit Dice, There is a 30% chance that any band has a shaman.Tasloi shamans may advance up to 5th level.When found in their lair, in addition to the males, there arefemales and young equal to 70% and 50% of the number ofmales, respectively. Females fight as males, but the young do notlight at all. The lair consists of a series of ld6 large trees with 4d6platforms 50-100 feet above the ground. All the trees are connect¬ed by vines and ropes. There is a 60% chance that the tasloi haveld6 trained giant spiders and a 20% chance that they have 2d4trained giant wasps, Tasloi are able to ride these wasps for greatdistances, and the spiders aid in the construction, protection, andoverall maintenance of the tree-village.Ecology: It is not known where and how tasloi originated. It islikely they have been around for many millennia, interbreedingin deep isolated jungles. Their primitive lifestyle has probably ex¬isted in much the same fashion for thousands upon thousands ofyears.While certainly among the least fearsome of all jungle crea¬tures, tasloi are perhaps worth worrying about in numbers, orafter fleeing encounters with nastier jungle denizens, Tasloi knowthe location of such lairs and often set up obvious escape routesfor any creature that foolishly finds itself confronting the beast.The tasloi then lay their traps along the escape path and wait forthe weakened, unsuspecting creatures to run through blindly.This strategy is highly successful, apparently, as the tasloi boastmany more trophies than their small size and limited prowessmight otherwise indicate.
Psionics, absorb: psionics, spells,and intelligenceEthereal existenceabsorb (See below)Thought eaters are natives of the Border Ethereal, and they onlysurvive in ethereal form. They appear as sickly gray skeletalbodies with oversized platypus heads. They have webbed skele¬tal paws, suited to swimming through the ether.A thought eater has only one desire—to avoid death. For somereason, they die almost instantly on the Prime materia) plane,Fortunately for them, they have several psionic powers whichhelp to prevent this.Combat: Thought eaters are unique. They have no combat abili¬ties except their innate psionic talents, even on the Border Ethersal, so they can be easily slain if encountered there.Thought eaters are far from harmless, however. Although theycannot survive outside the Border Ethereal, their psionic powersextend into the Prime material plane. This is one of the fewknown examples of transplanar extension.The thought eaters' psionic sense is always operating. Becauseof their unique abilities, they can sense psionic activity in thePrime material plane, as well as the Border Ethereal. When theydetect psionic activity of any kind, they will shift to the locationof the emanations.Their only "attack'' is their innate ability to absorb psionic en¬ergy. They can absorb psionic energy within 60 feet of a truepsionidst or psionic creature, or within 10 feet of a wild talent.Thought eaters drain 10 psionic points per round and they willalso absorb any spell cast in the area as well as memorized spells<5 points per spell level!. Finally, they can feed upon Intelligence,with each point converted to 10 PSPs that they absorb. They willfeed until all victims die or escape, or until they themselves aresated. This occurs when they reach a number of points equal totheir PSPs.Although they feed on brain power, thought eaters are essen¬tially stupid. Because they lack intelligence, they are immune toail telepathic attacks and controls (psionic or otherwise). Theirpreferences and the order in which they feed are always the same:1) psionic points being expended (causes power to fail); 2) magi¬cal energy being expended (causes spell to fail; 3) PSPs; 4! memo¬rized spells, 5) Intelligence. Note that if a thought eater consumesall of someone s Intelligence, the victim will become a vegetable(effectively dead). The Intelligence loss is permanent, unless it isrelieved by restore or psychic surgery. Spells can be re-memorized and drained PSPs can be recovered naturallyThe thought eaters' feeding frenzy has the sole purpose ofmaintaining thought eaters in the ether, Their bodies processPSPs the way humanoids process food, at a rate of 3 PSPs/hour.If they run out of points, they drop out of the ether into the Primematerial plane and meet an instant death.Note that ethereal beings are invisible to creatures on thePrime material plane, it is probable that a thought eater will at*tack and feed unnoticed and uncontested until sated, or until itsvictims are out of range. Although it only has a mo% r etnent rate of6, this is ethereal movement, allowing passage through wallstrees, etc. as if they didn't exist.Any defense mode except those with a 0 maintenance cost willprevent the thought eaters from feeding. This includes spells likemind blank t and magical devices that thwart psionic attacksPsionics Summary: Thought eaters have ldlQO + lOQ (101*200)PSPs. Their score is 18. They boast a natural, innate form of psi¬onic sense (in a metapsionic power), which operates continu¬ously at no cost to PSPs. They also absorb PSPs-see Combat.Habitat/Society: Little is known about thought eaters, exceptthat they exist solely in the ethereal plane and are very solitarybeings, Magical research has indicated that they are not malevo¬lent; their attacks are for the sole purpose of staying alive, thesame as any humanoid hunter. Some sages believe that thougheaters are the final fate of psionisists, once they die.Ecology: Thought eaters carry no treasure. When one dies, it au¬tomatically drops out of the ether and materializes on the Primematerial plane, Of course, they are usually dismissed as platypithat died from starvation.
ld4{ X 4)/ld4 + 1, orld4 + l and by weaponFaralyzarionMissile dodgeNilThe figures given above are for mature adult thri-kreen, Others have (hefollowing abilities, based on their age (they age one age category per yearuntil they reach mature adult );Thri-kreen are a rate of large, intelligent insects often referred to as “man¬tis warriors' They roam the deserts and savannahs, where they havemarked-out hunting territories. They have no need of sleep and can re¬main active through the day and night.Mature adult thri-kreen are roughly 7 feet tall at the shoulder and 11feet long. Ot the six limbs protruding from their midsection, two are usedFor walking; the other four end in four-fingered hands. The tough, sandy-yellow exoskeleton is extremely hard. A thri-kreen has two compoundeyes. usually black with highlighted eyespots, two antennae, and a com¬plicated jaw structure that manipulates food as the thri-kreen chews. Theantennae help the individual to maneuver through brush and grasslandsin the darkness (they also reduce any melee combat penalty from dark¬ness or blindness by I: missile combat is not affected), Thri-kreen oftenwear harnesses and even some forms of clothing, but they never weararmor.The native thri-kreen language is made up of dicks and the grinding ofits jaw appendages. While it is difficult for other creatures to speak thistongue, it is fust as difficult for a thri-kreen to imitate more standardspeech patterns. Thri-kreen speak their own language, but some under¬stand the Common tongue.two chatkcha per round, up to 90 yards. A chatkcha causes Id6 + 2 dam¬age when it hits, and returns to the thrower when it misses.Venom; This venom is delivered through an older thri-kreens bite.Anyone bitten must make a successful saving throw vs, paralyzatfon orbe paralyzed. Smaller than man-sized creatures are paralyzed for 2dlQrounds,, man-sized for 2dS rounds, large creatures for ld6 rounds, andhuge and gargantuan creatures for only one roundDodge missiles: A mature thri-kreen can dodge missiles fired at it on aroll of 9 or better on ld2Q; they cannot dodge magical effects, only physi¬cal missiles. Magical physical missiles (arrows, thrown axes, etc .) modifythis roll by their magica) bonus.Psion res: Some thri-kreen have psion ic wild talents. There is a 50%chance that any thri-kreen will have a psionic wild talent, described in theComplete Psionics Handbook ,Magical Items: Thri-kreen can use most magical Hems, though thosedesigned for humanoid creatures cannot be worn properly, so will notfunction for a thri-kreen.Hahit j[ Society: Thri-kreen organize into hunting packs; there are nopermanenl thri-kreen communities. Packs range over wide territoriesthat they call their own. Small groups consist only of mature adults.Groups of more than eight thri-kreen are two-thirds mature adults, andone-third other age categories (in about equal numbers).Ecology: Thri-kreen are carnivores. They seldom hunt other intelligentcreatures for food, but will do so in times of need, Mantis warriors have awell-known taste for elves, which keeps both races at an uneasy peace atbest.Combat: A thri-kreen's chitinous eKoskeleton gives it AC 5 naturally. Un¬armed. it can attack with four daws and one bite attack per round. Ifusing a weapon, the thri-kreen can attack with its weapon and bite. Theguthka, a pole arm with a blade a! each end, can slash for ld6 hp damageagainst man-sized or smaller targets, or IdKJ hp damage against a largertarget. The gythka can be thrown as a spear to inflict ld6 +2 hp damage.Thri-kreen also learn special combat maneuvers as they grow older,learning all by the time they are mature adults.Leap: This ability allows a thri-kreen to leap 20 feet straight up or up to50 feet forward. They cannot leap backward.Chatkcha; This is a crystalline throwing w edge. A thri-kreen can throwThe tohr-kreen, or mantis nobles, are larger, more cultured versions ofthri-kreen. Though many of them wander their w r orld to gain knowledge,they sometimes build cities as well. They regard thri-kreen as somewhatbarbaric cousins, though there have been incidences of a tohr-kreen cre¬ating a permanent settlement of thri-kreen. or teaching a pack more civi¬lized ways.The xixthii are spacefaring mantis. These creatures are skilled surgeonsand artificers, who enjoy replacing lost limbs with "more efficient" substi¬tutes.
Supra-genius to godlike (19-21 +)E. Q (x 10), RChaotic goodTitans are gargantuan, almost godlike men and woman. They,quite simply, look like 25’ tall people of great physical strengthand beauty. They are commonly dressed in traditional Greekgarb, favoring togas, loincloths, and such. They wear rare andvaluable jewelry and in other ways make themselves seem beau¬tiful and overpowering.In addition to speaking their own language, titans are able tospeak the six main dialects of giants. All titans are also conver¬sant in the common tongue as well as that commonly spoken byforest creatures, as these giants have close ties with nature,Combat: The basic attack of titans is their great maul (maul of thetitans). These monstrous beings are capable of attacking twice in amelee round and inflicting 7-42 points of damage per hit,Titans may choose to make a single other attack in a round.This form of special attack is so destructive and deadly, that atitan will use it only if there are no other options left open, Theform of each titan's attack will be different (some kick, somepunch, others use a breath attack, lightning, etc.), but the effectis the same for each. The special attack inflicts 10-60 points ofdamage per hit and can be used every' other round. These mightyattacks have been known to destroy buildings and sink ships.Titans can become ethereal twice per day. All titans are able toemploy both mage or priest spells (dependent on the individualtitan’—only one, not both) as a 20th-level spell caster. In addi¬tion, all titans have the following spell-like powers, at 20th levelof spell use, usable once per round, one at a time, at will:Titans arc not affected by attacks from nonmagical weapons.Habitat/Society: Titans are livers of life, creators of fate. Thesebenevolent giants are closer to the well springs of life than meremortals and, as such, revel in their gigantic existences. Titans arewild and chaotic. They are prone to more pronounced emotionsthat humans and can experience godlike fits of rage. They are,however, basically good and benevolent, so they tend not to takelife. They are very powerful creatures and will fight with ferocitywhen necessary.To some, titans seem like gods. With their powers they cancause things to happen that, surely, only a god could. They arefiery and passionate, displaying emotions with greater purityand less reservation than mortal beings. Titans are quick to an¬ger, but quicker still to forgive. In fits of rage they destroy moun¬tains and in moments of passion will create empires. They are inall ways godlike and in all ways larger than life.And yet is should be noted that titans are not gods. They arebeings that make their home in Olympus and walk among thegods. Yet they are not omnipotent, omniscient rulers of theplanes. Sometimes their godlike passions and godlike rages makethem seem like deities* however, and it is common for whole civi¬lizations to mistake them for deities.In one society, Jeuron, a titan with dominion over knowledge,was revered as a god for centuries. Those mortals built theirwhole civilization around him and Jeuron revelled in the wor¬ship. He even walked among them occasionally to see their loveand admiration. But Odin, of the Norse mythos. discovered hisdeception and punished leuron by shackling him to the bottom ofthe deepest sea for 100 years.Titans have a natural affinity for storm giants. Those giantsare the closest beings the titans have found to peers and they willreadily befriend them. In any group of titans, there is a 35%chance that they will be accompanied by one or more storm gi¬ants. Although titans can sometimes be condescending by na¬ture, they never treat the storm giants as subordinates orinferiors.On Olympus, titans have developed a culture similar to whatthey found there. They wear similar clothing, eat similar foods,play similar music, etc. It is unclear why this has occurred. Per¬haps the titans, m a godlike whim, adopted their favorite mortallifestyle. Such would not be unusual for these great beings.Titans primarily dwell in great palaces and mansions in Olym¬pus where they live their lives whimsically. There they willdance, sing, study debate and engage in ail other manner of ac¬tivities with titanic proportion. If a titan finds something that in¬terests him, it would not be unusual for him to study it in greatdetail for many weeks, only to leave it when his interest haswaned. They may also engage in debates or arguments that lastliterally for weeks at a time. These debates might end in a joviallaughter and good spirits or in thunder and rage. Such are thewhims of titans.Ecology; Titans are basically identical to humans, except muchlarger. What makes them immortal is not known. Perhaps it istheir enchanted existence in the halls of Olympus.These giants are commonly known to experience the samerange of emotions as humans do. They develop idiosyncrasies ashumans do, also. In fact, titan mannerisms emulate those of hu¬mans very closely. Again, it is difficult to tell if the titans arewhimsically copying humans, or vice versa*Titans, being godlike creatures, tend to be very diverse andunique. Each individual titan (or sometimes group of titans) have aspecial power is that related to their personality or sphere of influ¬ence, These powers are very different, and usually very strong.Some examples of the powers of a titan are explained below:Algorn, a titan that has influence over the seas, has the ability tocreate u>af*?r whenever he chooses to. This water can be vastas he desires, up to the volume of a medium-sized lake. Al-gom can simply cause the water to flow, he can cause it to jetout from his hands (washing away everything In its pathaway), or he can even cause the water to be frozen.Mane, a titan with dominion over felines, has the ability tochange into a giant form of any cat. When he transforms, he isinstantly cured of all wounds, poisons, and diseases. Manemay change into a cat and back again five times per day.Porphyl is a titan with the power of growth. He may cause anyimmature life to grow to maturity. Thus, he can cause crops togrow, he can make a boy grow to manhood, etc. Porphyl isvery wise and would never abuse his ability,Malephus, a titan with influence over law and justice can unerr*ingly detect any spoken lie and any bad intention. He is oftenused by many greater powers in trials of justice. Malephus istotally honest: he is incapable of lies or deception.Syliia. a titan with power over love, can remove any negativefeelings from any being (except deities and powers). She hasthe ability to remove hatred, unhappiness, depression, etc*SyIlia cannot remove the feeling permanently, but for at leasta day or so. The deities of the upper planes often employ herpower when trying to stop wars,Girzon, a titan with dominion over death, can take the life fromany living being. It should be noted that Girzon has neverused this ability unless commanded to by a deity* Girzon"s re¬straint and self-control is revered by other titans.Greater Titans: Rumors exist of a race of titans more powerfulstill than common titans. These greater titans are said to be verydose to the gods and always accompany one (with some deitiesand powers being attended by more than one greater titan). Per¬haps greater titans were formally common titans who havegrown so great in power that the gods brought them closer tothemselves. Such matters are not common knowledge.It is very' difficult to provide combat statistics for greater ti¬tans. Like the gods themselves, greater titans are simply not sub¬ject to aggression from nondivine beings. They are never harmedby such attacks.
Giant toads are Found in most regions. Although their smaller cous¬ins are beneficial insect eaters, the large toads devour {or at least at¬tempt to devour) any creature which appears edible.Their exact appearance varies from species to species, but thesebeasts are all just what their name implies, giant versions of toads.Coloration runs the gamut from weak brown to iron red, but theirskin is always dry, rough to the touch, and warty.Combat; All giant toads can jump up to their movement distance.This hop will dear any object up to one- third as high as the length otthe leap and requires but a single round to accomplish. A jumpingtoad can attack in midair or at the end of the leap.When hunting, giant toads remain motionless until likely preywalks or slithers within range. The toad then leaps to the attack; thevictim has a -3 penalty on its surprise roll.Habitat Society: Giant toads often make their homes underground,where they enjoy both the damp air and the steady supply of food.They prefer temperate zones, near water where they can lay theireggs, but often survive in surprisingly cool or dry regions.Toads are often attracted to settled areas where they prey uponlivestock (goats, chickens, and even sheepL Cities often have prob¬lems with sewer toads, giant monstrosities which have grown fat onvermin, house pets, and, occasionally, civil engineers.Ecology: Giant toads keep no treasure, but worthwhile indigesti-bles are occasionally found in their droppings. Their skin can be fash¬ioned into suitable leather armor, but its odor will be at least asdistinctive as its appearance.These large, red toads are about 4 feet long and covered with rough,purple warts. Fire toads shun water, preferring drier surroundings.Fire toads are so named because of their ability to exhale small tire-balls. These fireballs are their only form of attack; a single fireballcan travel up to 30 feet and has a blast radius of 5 feel. Damage isequal to 2-16 points, half that if a saving throw vs. spell is made. Firetoads rarely attack unless threatened, molested, or defending theirlairs. Fire toads subtract 1 point of damage on all dice for fire-basedattacks against them, but cold- or water-based attacks inflict an addi¬tional point of damage per die, Throwing liquid—even water—at afire toad will cause it to retreat, though it will immediately breathetwice at its assailant in the round of its retreat.Fully intelligent, ice toads dwell in cold dimes or far beneath the sur¬face of the ground. In addition to its vicious bite, the creature canradiate cold in a 10-foot radius from its body Ice toads can generatethis special attack once every other round. All noncold-using crea¬tures within this sphere of cold suffer 3-18 points of damage. Charac¬ters making a saving throw vs, spell suffer only half damage. Icetoads speak their own weird language and actively collect gems andjewelry, particularly diamonds.These toads, indistinguishable from common giant toads, secrete aweak, hemotoxic poison. A creature bitten by a poisonous toad mustsave vs, poison at +2. Failure means the victim falls comatose andwill die within 24 hours unless treated.
Treants are strangely related to bath humans and trees, combin¬ing features of both species, Peaceful by nature, ireants can causegreat damage when roused to anger. They hate evil things and theunrestrained use of fire.Treants are almost indistinguishable from trees. Their skin is athick, textured, brown bark. Their arms are gnarled like branch¬es and their legs fit together when standing like the trunk of atree. Above the eyes and along the head are dozens of smallerbranches from which hang great leaves. In winter the leaves of atreant change color but rarely fall out. Treants are very intelli¬gent and often speak a number of languages including their own.ell, dwarf, common, and a smattering of just about all other hu¬manoid tongues (at least enough to say 'Get out of my trees! '),Combat; The combat ability of treants varies with their size.Young treants (13 or 14 feet) have 7 or 8 HlL Dice and inflict 2-16points of damage per attack Middle-aged treants (15 or 16 feet)have 9 or 10 Hit Dice, respectively and inflict 3-18 points of dam¬age per attack. Elder treants (17 or IS feet) have 11 or 12 Hit Diceand inflict 4-24 points of damage per attack.Due to their tough, barklike skin, treants have a superior Ar*mor Class rating against almost all weapons. Their only weak¬ness is fire. Any fire-based attack against a treant is at +4 to hitand +1 damage. In addition, treants save against all fire-basedattacks at -4, This weakness to fire also applies to animated treescontrolled by a treant.Treants have the ability to animate normal trees. One treantcan animate up to two trees. It takes one round for a norma! treeto uproot itself. Thereafter the animated tree can move at a rateof 3 per turn and fights as a full-grown treant (12 Hit Dice, twoattacks, 4-24 points of damage per attack), A treant must bewithin 60 yards of the tree it is attempting to animate* Animatedtrees lose their ability to move if the treant who animated them isincapacitated or moves more than 60 yards away,Treants (regardless of size) and t reant-con trolled trees can in¬flict structural damage when attacking a building or fortification*HabitatSociety: Treants live in small communities, usuallyamidst old hardwood forests (oak. maple, mahogany, etc,). Inthe forest treants rarely reveal themselves, preferring not to inter¬act with the more transient Jifeforms (anything with a lifespan of500 years or less). Humans and demihumans have only a slightchance of spotting a treant who is trying to blend in with thetrees, Rangers have a fair chance of spotting a treant (10% perlevel),Treants are intolerant of evil particularly when fire and thewanton destruction of trees is involved* They hate ores and gob¬lins with a passion and tend to be suspicious of anyone carryingan ax.Treants have no use for treasure, and usually place all suchitems somewhere out of sight, such as under a great rock* Occa¬sionally a treant can be convinced to give up his treasure but onlywhen some great good will be accomplished by this generosity.Ecology: Treants, like all trees, gain sustenance via photosyn¬thesis, Treants often sleep for long periods of time (anywherefrom a few days to several years) during which short roots growinto the ground beneath them gathering water and minerals fromthe soil. Reproduction is via off-shoot stalks which the femaletreants then protect and care for until the stalks are grown.The lifespan of a treant is not known, but is several thousandyears at least* As they grow older, treants become slower and lessagile, sleeping for longer periods and talking less of things thatare and more of things that were. Eventually an old treant willnot wake up, taking permanent root in the spot where he sleepsand living out the rest of his life as a normal tree.OmnivoreHigh and up (13 +)HQ (t 5, T)Neutral (good)Exceptional (4-6 HD): 650Exceptional (7-8 HD): 2,000Mage; 2,000Tritons are rumored to be creatures from the elemental plane ofWater that have been placed on the Prime Material plane forsome purpose unknown to man They are sea dwellers, inhabit¬ing warmer waters principally but equally able to live at shallowor great depths.The lower half of a triton ends in two finned legs, while itstorso, head, and arms are handsomely human. Tritons have a sil¬very skin that fades into silver-blue scales on the lower half oftheir bodies. Their hair is deep blue or blue-green, Triton speaktheir own language as well as those of sea elves and lo cat hah,Combat: Tritons carry either tridents (60%) or long spears(40%), Some 25% are also armed with heavy crossbows. Whenequipped for battle, tritons wear armor made of scales [AC 4).Outside their lain tritons are 90% likely to be mounted, eitheron hippocampi (65%) or giant sea horses (35%). These mountsfight in defense of their riders.Exceptional tritons (see below) and triton leaders always carryconch shells with them. Not magical their sounds are wellknown to all marine creatures. When blown properly by an ex¬ceptional triton, a conch summons 5d4 hippocampi, IdIO sea li¬ons, or 5d6 giant sea horses. These creatures swim to the aid ofthe summoning triton arriving Id6 rounds after the conch is f irstsounded. Theconchs can also be sounded to frighten aquatic ani¬mals as the fear spell. This latter noise causes all marine creatureswithin 60 feet and with animal Intelligence or less to flee in panic.Creatures are allowed a saving throw vs. spell to avoid the feareffect, but even those who succeed with their saving throws havea -5 modifier on their attack rolls against the tritons.Triton are reclusive and nonviolent. They normally attack tocapture. If a triton is killed in a battle, however, the fight immedi¬ately becomes one of retribution. Should the fighting go poorly,the tritons withdraw to their lair to either gather reinforcementsor make a last stand.In addition to their other abilities, tritons are nearly impervi¬ous to magic with a natural magic resistance of 90%.Habitat/Society: Tritons live either in great undersea castles(80% chance) or in finely sculpted caverns (20%). While tritonslean toward good alignment, they are very suspicious of outsid¬ers and have no love for land dwellers in general.Tritons rarely kill unless provoked, but they are quick to ap¬prehend those who intrude upon their seas. Trespassers foundguilty of intentionally entering triton waters or treasure seekingare left "to the fate of the seas." This means being stripped of allbelongings and set adrift at least 10 miles from any shoreline.Characters ruled innocent by the triton court awaken the nextday on some distant shore. Tritons never aid land dwellers unlesstheir own interests are involved in the matter.For every 10 tritons encountered there is an exceptional tritonof 4-6 Hit Dice. For every 20 encountered there is an exceptionaltriton with 7-8 Hit Dice. Groups of 50 or more are always accom¬panied by a triton leader (AC 2, 9 Hit Dice), There is a 10%chance for every 10 tritons encountered that they are accompa¬nied by a triton mage of Ido levels.At a triton lair, the following additional tritons are alwaysfound:There is also a 75% chance that the lair contains 2d6 sea lions aspets /guards.Ecology: Tritons are omnivorous and live on fish, shellfish, andsea weed. They have no natural enemies save the giant squid,which is immune to the effects of their conch shells. Normal tri¬ton live approximately 300 years while their leaders and spell-casters have life expectancies of 500 years or more.
Troglodytes are a warlike race of carnivorous reptilian human¬oids that dwell in natural subterranean caverns and in the cracksand crevices of mountains. They hate man above ail other crea¬tures and often launch bloody raids on human communities insearch of food and steel.Troglodytes stand about 6 feet tall, are covered in roughenedleathery scales, and have a toothy lizard-like head. Males are eas¬ily distinguished from females by the fin-like crest that runsacross their heads and down their necks T Coloration for bothsexes varies due to the troglodyte's chameleon-like ability tochange skin tone, but grayish brown is most common. Mosttroglodytes wear little more than a leather weapons belt, withperhaps a small bag of semi-fresh meat. Leaders adorn their beltswith pieces of steel, a sign of power in troglodyte culture. Troglo¬dytes have excellent infravision (90-foot range). They speak theirown language and no other.Combat: Fifty percent of a troglodyte force use their teeth andclaws. The remaining 50% use weapons: swords (5%). stonebattle axes (10% ) P stone morning stars (10%), or two troglodytejavelins (25%). Of special note is the troglodyte javelin. Thesegreat darts grant a +3 bonus to the attack roll when thrown by atroglodyte: they cause 2d4 points of damage. This bonus reflectsthe troglodytes' great skill with these darts. About 25% of troglo¬dytes carry two such darts apiece,Troglodytes prefer ambushes to frontal assaults. Their favoritetactic is to pick a wdl-trod mountain or subterranean path andthen use their chameleon power to blend in with the surroundingrocks, When a likely target walks by the troglodytes hurl a vol¬ley of javelins (this attack gives opponents a -4 penalty to theirsurprise rolls, but only for the initial round). After a second vol¬ley the troglodytes descend upon their hapless victims.When angered or engaged in melee, troglodytes secrete an oilthat smells extremely disgusting to all humans and demihumans.Those failing their saving throws vs. poison are so revolted as tolose ld6 points of Strength. This loss remains in effect for 10rounds,Habitat-Society: Troglodyte society is organized into clans,with each dan led by a chieftain (usually the biggest and mostfearsome troglodyte), A number of subchieftains also arepresent chosen from those troglodytes that most distinguishedthemselves in battle. Rank is loose and internal squabbles com¬mon. Most chieftains lead only as long as the dan stays fed (andnot one meal longer).For every 10 troglodytes encountered there is one leader with 3Hit Dice, For every 20 there are two subchieftains each with 4 HitDice. Groups of 60 or more always include the dan chieftain.The chieftain stands 7 feet tall, has 6 Hit Dice, and is accompa¬nied by 2d4 guards with 3 HiL Dice each.Troglody tes usually set their lair near a human or demihumansettlement. This enables them to prey on both the settlers andtheir livestock. The lair itself is typically a large cave or cavernwith a number of smaller chambers adjoining it for the femalesand hatchlings. Troglodyte lairs contain a number of femalesequal to 100% of the males. Females have 1 +1 Hit Dice each andfight to the death in defense of the hatchlings. Hatchlings numberabout 50% of the male population and are noncombatants.Troglodytes value steel above all else, using it to make javelinsand as a form of wealth. Individual troglodytes carry nothing ofreal worth, but their lair may contain considerable treasureamassed from their raids on the outside world. Often this wealthis carelessly strewn about, mixed in with half-eaten food, or justshoved into some out-of-the-way corner.On moonless nights, raiding parties of 50 or more troglodytesventure forth in search of steel and food. These attacks usuallytarget human settlements, where the troglodytes can use theirinfravision and their chameleon power to maximum advantage.Ecology: Strict carnivores, troglodytes prefer human flesh overail others, but they won't hesitate to devour practically anythingthey can catch, including members of other troglodyte dans. Fewcreatures hunt troglodytes, for their taste is said to be even morevile than their odor.
Trulls are horrid carnivores found in all climes, from arctic wastelands totropical jungles. Most creatures avoid these beasts, since trolls know nofear and attack unceasingly when hungry. Their frame appears thin andtrail, but trolls possess surprising strength. Their arms and legs are longand ungainly. The legs end in great three-toed feel, the arms in wide,powerful hands with sharpened claws The trolls' rubbery hide is coloreda moss green, mottled green and gray, or putrid gray. A writhing hairlikemass grows out of their skulls and is usually greenish black or iron gray incolon Their dull, sunken black eyes possess 90-foot infra vision. Femalesare easily distinguished from males; they are both larger and more pow¬erful than their male counterparts.Trolls walk upright but hunched forward with sagging shoulders. Thetrolls gait is uneven and. when running, the arms dangle free and dragalong the ground. For all this seeming awkwardness, trolls are very' agileThey are masterful climbers and can scale even sheer cliffs with art 30%chance of success. Trolls have a poor hearing, but their sense of smell issuperior.Trolls have no language of their own, using Urolkpeak' a gutturalmishmash of common, giant, goblin, ore, and hobgoblin, Trollspeak ishighly transient and trolls from one area are only 25% likely to be able tocommunicate with trolls from another,Combat: Trolls attack w ith two clawed hands and their bile, and they canattack at multiple opponents. In the rare case that a troll wields a weap¬on. it attacks with a +3 damage bonus. Trolls regenerate at an amazingrate. Starting three rounds after first blood, the creatures recovers 3 hitpoints per round until healed. Trolls reduced to 0 or fewer hit points fallto the ground, incapacitated but not slain. Incapacitated trolls continueto regenerate and stand up to fight as soon as they have a positive numberof hit points.When using an edged weapon, it Is possible to sever the thin limbs of atroll (a natural 20 with an edged weapon is needed). Severed limbs con¬tinue to fight after separation from the body [hands squeeze, heads bite ifstepped on, etc.), Attacks by severed limbs are at normal chances to hit.Separated limbs fight for the remainder of the battle, then scuttle backand rebind with the body once the battle is over Umbs unable to reachthe body to die within 24 hours, but this is of little consequence sincetrolls regenerate lost body parts (including the head) within a week. If atroll is dismembered and scattered, the largest surviving piece regener¬ates. The others die within one day if they cannot rejoin that piece. Onlyfire and acid cause permanent damage to trolls. These forms of attackdestroy its regenerative ability, A troll reduced to 0 or fewer hit pointsand immersed in add or burned with fire is killed.Trolls have no fear of death, and launch themselves into combat j flail¬ing wildly at their opponents and biting whoever comes closest. Theyoccasionally '25%) throw stones before dosing with their victims.Thrown stones have a maximum range of 20 yards, weigh 10 to 20pounds, and inflict ld8 points of damage, If confronted by a large naturalor magical fire, trolls try to find some way around the flames. Trolls com¬bine a ravenous appetite with limited intelligence, so they are frequentlydistracted and break off pursuit 50% of the time to pick up food droppedby fleeing preyHabilat'Suuety: Trolls can survive in all dimes, but prefer dense forestsand subterranean locales, since bright sunlight hurts their eyes; trolls suf¬fer no combat penalties because of this. They usually make their lairs incaveSj using great boulders to block the entrances. Inside a troll cave are anumber of rough nests made of straw and grass, plus scattered bones andtreasure from victims. 11 there are no caves in an area, trolls dig them¬selves a trollhole and cover its opening with twigs and leaves. Trollholesare usually built near trees and are 90% undetectable. Anyone who stepson a trollhole is 75% likely to fall through the leafy door and tumble intothe den below.Trolls live in small packs of 3 to 12 trolls led by a dominant female whoacts as shaman/chieftain. She casts priest spells at 7th level; spheres typi¬cally include Charm. Divination, Sun (Darkness only), and Weather.Leadership is only retained by combat, so fights for pack control are fre¬quent, Often trolls rend each other limb from limb, but these battles arenever fatal. Still, it is the custom of trolls to loss the loser s head a greatdistance from the fight scene, and frequently losers must sit and stew for aweek until their new head grows in.The pack chieftain's duties are few' She leads the trolls on nightly for¬ages, loping along, sniffing the air for prey, If a scent is found, the trollscharge, racing to get there first, and letting out a great cry once prey isspotted. In return for being the hunt leader, the shaman gets her choice ofmates in the pack. Females give birth to a single troll about once everyfive years.Trolls have ravenous appetites, devouring everything from simplegrubs to bears and humans. Their lairs are often located near humansettlements or along well traveled roads, but not too near, for even trollsrespect organized resistance by fire-bearing humans. Wandering trolls, insearch of a new |air r travel by night and sleep by day. Ravenous fromwalking, these packs, on occasion, attack and devour entire humanoidvillages.Ecology: Trolls prey on all but the most powerful of creatures. They re¬spect and (car dragons, but they hate giants of good alignment and wagewar with them frequently. The trolls green blood is used to manufactureboth poison antidotes and healing potions. The blood from one troll,worth 400 gp, can make three such potions.These ferocious troll, ettin crossbreeds posses a mottled greenish brown skintone, and iheir dress is usually moth-eaten rags or animal skins. Twoheadedtrolls use trollspeak as their language. Though part Ettin, these monsters re-tain many of the abilities of trolls, They regenerate like trolls, but only 1 hitpoint a round and severed limbs cannot reattach (their thicker limbs are notcleaved on a roll of 20). Two-headed trolls attack with two daws and twobites. Both bite attacks are against one opponent, but the daws may be di¬rected against different foes. The troll can, though rarely, wield a weaponwith a + o damage bonus. Like ettins, two-headed trolls are surprised only ona 1. These creatures live in damp, underground caverns and can be foundleading groups of their smaller troll cousins.These gibed trolls, ako called scrags or river trolls, are the most loath¬some of all the trolls, River troEls, as their name implies, travel the water¬ways in search ot victims. Their arms are thin and frail but their mouthsare wide and lined with dozens of needle-sharp tangs. Their color rangesfrom blue-green to olive. Scrags have all oi the abilities of normal trolls,but they only regenerate when immersed in fresh water. Scrags can butvive out of water for one hour and often come ashore in search of preyRiver trolls devour anything they catch, but prefer humanoids and have afondness for dwarves.Scrags are devious hunters and often carry a few baubles with them.They lay gems, near the waters edge and wait for someone to spot themand reach down. Other traps include burying themselves in the sand, inshallow water, and waiting to be stepped on or tangling the rudders ofsmall boats River trolls occasionally nest beneath bridges or near ferryboats, demanding a toll in exchange for passage. The toll varies, but av¬erages the equivalent oi one cow per week, per troll. Livestock and chibdren frequently disappear when river trolls are near. Scrag shamans alsohave access to Eemental (water) spellsLike freshwater scrags, marine scrags cart breathe air for one hour andhave all of the abilities ot normal trolls, except they regenerate only whenimmersed Ln saltwater, Large green, and pot-bellied, marine scrags arethick-skinned and heavily scaled. Limp hair, the color uf seaweed, hangsdown to their shoulders. Their feet are wide and webbed to aid them inswimming. While their limbs are shorter and weaker than those of ordi¬nary trolls* their mouths are larger and filled with hundreds of needle-sharp teeth Marine scrags can subsist on fish and shellfish, but cravehuman flesh. They create their lairs in shallow ocean caves or beneathcity docks. They emerge from their caves at night, climbing over shiprailings in search of sailors or hunting the piers for a strolling couple or alone drunk. Their attacks are quick and stealthy; they usually hunt inpacks of four to sbe, but occasionally, several dozen may attack a largeship. Marine scrag shamans also have access to Elemental (water! spells.Desert trolls are usually tan. but can modify their color from bleachedtan to mottled rock brown, causing a -2 penalty to opponents surpriserolls. Their keen senses and animal cunning reduce their chances of beingsurprised to l-Ln-10. Like normal trolls the desert variety usually attackswith two claws and a bite.Desert trolls are immune to normal tiro, heat, and cold. They do notregenerate acid damage damage from magical fire, or fire breath weap¬ons In addition, they suffer damage from normal water that cannot beregenerated Normal water inflicts ld4 points of damage per vial, 2d4points per flask, and 4d4 points per skin A foamier of endless wateraimed directly at a desert troll (successful attack roll required) causes 25points of damage per round, Puri l ied water 1 including normal and holywater! causes double damage. A potion of sweet water causes 6d6 pointsof damage and the troll must make a saving throw vs. poison or die.These trolls are rougher and more tenacious than their more commoncounterparts, but they are also more solitary. They skulk at the edges ofsettled areas, waylaying travelers and polluting sources ol pure waterSpectral trolls, taking material form only in darkness, are tormented bythe memory of life. They try to slay all living creatures they encounter.Resembling normal trolls in all respects except color, their jet black skinand hair make them easily distinguishable from other trolls, Spectraltrolls have the same attacks us regular trolls and can divide them amongmany opponents, A silver or magical weapon is needed to attack them,making the final disposition of a spectral troll an even trickier prospect.Being undead, spectral trolls can be turned by priests as Lhough theywere specters. It is noted that a humanoid slain by a spectra) troll be¬comes one itself in three days, unless a proper burial ceremony is per¬formed by a priest of the victim s religion Spectra] trolls vanish in directsunlight. They do not take damage trom sunlight, they merely tade fromview and reappear at the same spot at nightfall, Even those captured,unconscious, or trapped in temporal stash have escaped permanent im¬prisonment in this manner.Giant Trolls are hideous hill giant trol] crossbreeds. They resemble nor¬mal trolls in all respects, except for their unnatural size. Their skin is red*dish brown and they have red-rimmed eyes.Despite their pot-bellied appearance, giant trolls are immensely strongand inflict damage [ike a hiJI giant when they are using their favoriteweapon of attack—a large spiked dub made from a tree trunk or a housetimber. These dubs cause 2d6 + 7 points ot damage. In those rare in¬stances when a giant troll has no weapons, its claws inllict Ido + 1 pointsof damage; as with all trolls, the claw attacks can be divided among dif¬ferent opponents as necessary,Instead of using their claws to attack weaponless giant trolls are morelikely to grab medium-sized prey in their large hands and wield the strug¬gling victim like a dub, beating a new target with the body. Refer to therules on hand-to-hand combat in the Dungeon Masters Guide for guide¬lines.Giant trolls who are overwhelmed by many small- and medium-sizedopponents take time to grab and hurl the warriors into nearby trees, leav¬ing more time to deal with the softer, weaker enemies. Note that, like hillgiants, giant trolls can catch missiles 25% of the time, If in reach, and canhurl boulders that cause 2d8 points of damage.Unlike norma) trolls and their doser relatives, giant trolls never attackwith their bite. This is due to the fact that they are much taller than themeals they like best (humanoids, of course), and they find i( difficult tobend forward with the flexibility normal trolls ertjoy.Then too. the headof a giant troll, more than any other part of the cross-breed anatomy, isalmost identical to that of a hill giant, except that their skin is reddishbrown. The giant troll also lacks the razor sharp teeth of normal trollsthat strike fear in so manyGiant [rolls regenerate damage as normal trolls, but at the rate of 2 hitpoints per round They cannot reattach severed timbs. Before a giant trollcan be killed, at least 10 points of damage must be inflicted on il by fire. Ifthis condition is not met, and the giant troll is reduced to a single hitpoint, further damage has no effect, except to prevent regeneration.They have a very acute sense of smell and 90-foot infra vision. Gianttrolls are feared throughout the world, for not only do they possess thehorrible ability to regenerate damage inflicted upon them, bul they alsopossess the power and strength of hill giant* i| fearsome in their ownright). The combination is a deadly one. and, even worse, giant trollstravel in loose tribal bands of ldl2 members. They are rarely encounteredalone, Lairs of giant trolls are always served by 2do normal trolls who actas simple lackeys "and sometimes food) for their larger cousins.Giant trolls are found in nearly every clime. Giant trolls are on goodterms with strong hill giant tribes, lor which they serve as elite personalguardians for the ruling chief,The ice troll is a smaller, more intelligent relative of the normal troll, andis probably the result of magical experimentation. It closely resembles itsmore common cousin, but has semitransparent, very cold skin. Ice trollsare famous tor being cunning, evil creatures which keep humans anddemi-humans as livestock. Because ice trolls need water to regeneratethey never leave their Jakes and rivers, and will create elaborate traps tolure their prey to them.Ice trolls are organized and intelligent enough to know their weakness¬es, and rarely start a light at a disadvantage. Unlike their larger and lessintelligent cousins, they do not wade into combat blindly, bul will try topick off weaker opponents one by one, hoping to bring back live prey. Icetrolls generally attack with claws for JdfS hit points of damage each, buthave been known to use weapons on rare ticcasions 00%), at an addi¬tional + 4 to each weapon s damage due to Strength, Attacks may be di¬rected against different opponents.The regenerative powers of ice trolls are not as great as normal trolls.An ice troll must be immersed in water to be able to regenerate t hitpoints per melee round- The creatures often make their stand in a shallowpool of water to keep this advantage.Because of the thin, brittle nature of the ice troll, it is possible to severone o! the creatures limbs with an edged weapon, on a natural attack rollof 20 with an edged weapon. Severed limbs also regenerate 2 hit pointsper turn, as long as they are immersed in water. If a severed limb is not incontact with water, it will move up to 30 feet in search of water, alwaysmoving toward it, if it is in range.Fire and acid are the only attack forms which negate the ice troll's abilityto regenerate.Because ol the ice troll s physiology, fire-based attacks do double dam¬age. Ice trolls are unaffected by cold or cold-based spells, and because oftheir magical nature, can only be hit by magical weapons or missiles.Ice trolls live in groups of 7-12 in arctic and sub-arctic regions, nearopen water. Because they are smaller and less resilient than their largercousins, they have developed a higher sense of cooperation to stay alive.Each group has a leader, usually the most intelligent. Leaders are respon¬sible for keeping the group safe and well-fed.Ice trolls live near settled regions, hoping to waylay and capture humans and demi-humans. Ice trolls will frequently bait traps for adventur¬ers, using treasure they have salvaged from previously waylaid groups.Settlements also provide more common livestock, which, although lesspreferable than human flesh, is considered edible in times of need. Icetrolls establish their lairs near lakes or rivers. Here the ice trolls will havegathered all Lheir treasure, as well as 5-20 human or demi-human cap¬tives, These prisoners are kept well-fed on grains and vegetables, so thatthe ice trolls need never go too long without food.Ice trolls mate in the spring and give birth to one baby ice troll in thelate tall, When an ice troll tribe gets too largo it splits one group wander¬ing off to find a new lair Ice trolls that live in arctic regions often huntremorhaz, and will even pick off a solitary frost giant, ke troll blood isfrequently used in the manufacture of frost brand swords, and ring* ofcold resistance.The spirit troll is an odious mutation of the spectral troll. Several schoolsof thought completely separate this creature from the spectral variety,presenting evidence that the spirit troll b a perverted magical interbreed¬ing of trolls and invisible stalkers. The spirit troll is invisible: charactersable to see invisible objects observe it to be very similar to a Iroll. slightlyshorter and with diffused features. The spirit troll can only be hit by mag^ical weapons. Fire inflicts Lull damage, but it is invulnerable to cold-basedattacks. It regenerates as does a troll, and at the same rate.It attacks with its tangs and two sharp claw r s, against three differentopponents if it so desired. The damage inflicted by its fangs (2d4 +2) isnormal damage, except that the spirit troll adds the damage to its own hitpoints—in effect healing itself! The damage inflicted by the spirit troll'sdaws (ld4 +2) is taken not only from the victim s hit points but also fromStrength. Strength points lost in this way are recovered in 2d4 turns. If acharacters Strength is reduced to 0. the PC dies. II the Strength is reducedto 1 or 2 points, the PC is rendered comatose, only recovering when landif) sufficient hit points are recovered to raise the Strength to 3 or moreThe spirit troll has an acute sense of smell and superior, 120 foot-rangeinfravision.
Umber hulks are power!ul subterranean predators whose iron-like daws allow them to burrow through solid stone in search ofpreyUmber hulks are tremendously strong, standing nearly 8 feettall and over 5 feet wide, Musdes bulge beneath their thick, scalyhides and their powerful arms and legs ail carry great claws.They have no necks to speak of, but the head features a powerfulmaw with rows of triangular teeth and 8-inch mandibles capableof biting through any hide or bone. Most peculiar of all are thefour round eyes, spaced evenly across each umber hulks fore¬head. Umber hulks are black, shading to a lighter shade ofyellowish gray on the front, Their eyes are mere blackeneddots each the size of a small coin. Umber hulks have their ownlanguage.Combat: For all of their monstrous features, umber hulks areintelligent opponents, They usually dig to a point adjacent to amain corridor, then wait, peeking through a crack they've made,until likely prey walks by. The umber hulk then springs out uponits startled victim. When using this technique, opponents have a -5 modifier on their surprise rolls. Other tactics involve plannedcave-Lns and dead-end tunnels where an umber hulk can wait Forvictims to come to him. Their burrowing rate varies from 10 feetper turn in solid stone to 60 feet per turn in soft earth.In melee, umber hulks can deliver a vicious bite but, under¬standably, their main weapon is their great daws. Worse, look¬ing mlo an umber hulk's eyes causes confusion, as per the spell,unless a saving throw versus spell is made. In addition to thisspecial confusion attack the outer eyes oi an umber hulk providethe creature with infravision to a distance of 90 feet.The one saving grace when lighting an umber hulk is theirspeed. Their gall is slow and ponderous and their balance is poorin wide spaces.Umber hulks never fight to the death unless cornered (which israre, since the creature can dig through stone). If hard pressed,an umber hulk won t hesitate to cause a cave-in (23% chance ofsuccess per round) and then dig his way to freedom.HabitatSodety Umber hulks dwell in the depths of the earth.They raid dungeons for food, much Lhe way ant eaters raid ant colo¬nies, eating their fill and then moving on to let the " colony' recover.Umber hulks are usually solitary hunters. Males and femalesmate, then go their separate ways. One to three young are bornabout a year later in a special nursery which has been hollowedout by the female. Two years later, once the hulklings are bigenough, the female begins taking them with her when hunting. Itis during this period that unfortunate victims may stumble acrossmore than one umber hulk at a time.No umber hulk culture is known, but it is rumored that theremay be entire cities of these beings underground with tunnelsthat radiate out, like threads in a spider s web, toward the nearerdungeons and mountain ranges. If true, this would explain much,for umber hulks seem to disappear or spring up in a region at willand always take great care in hiding their tunnels behind them,Ecology: Umber hulks eat young purple worms, ankhegs, andsimilar creatures. Their favorite prey however, is humankind.These aquatic predators are closely related to the umber hulk,Vodyanoi live in deep bodies of fresh water* They are similar inappearance to umber hulks but have only two eyes and thus lackthe ability to confuse opponents. Their skin is green and slimy tothe touch, but beneath it is a thick, knobby hide. Their claws arewebbed. Vodyanoi prey upon all manner of creatures but preferhuman flesh. They can rend the hulls of small vessels and fre¬quently sink or overturn small boats. Once per day a vodyanoican attempt to summon 1-20 electric eels with a 50% chance ofsuccess. The existence of a saltwater variety of vodyanoi of twicethe size and greater ferocity is rumored but unconfirmed.
Unicorns dwell only in temperate woodlands, away from humanhabitation. These fierce but good creatures shun contact with allbut sylvan creatures (dryads, pixies, sprites, and the like): how¬ever, they will show themselves to defend their woodland home.Powerful steeds with gleaming coats of pure white hair, Uni¬com eyes are usually deep sea blue or fiery pink. Long, silkywhite strands of hair hang down from the mane and forelock. Asingle ivory-colored horn, 2 to 3 feet In length, grows from thecenter of each unicorn s forehead. Males are distinguished by thewhite beard beneath the chin: females by their more elegant andslimmer musculature. The hooves of a unicorn are cloven andyellow-ivory in color. Unicorns speak their own language as wellas those of other sylvan creatures and elves.Combat; Unicorns can sense an enemy from 240 yards away.Likewise, unicorns move very silently, so opponents are penal¬ized -6 on their surprise rolls. Unicorns can kick with their fronthooves and thrust with the horn each round. Due to the horn'smagical nature, it always has a +2 bonus to hit, Unicorns cancharge into battle, using the horn like a lance. To make thischarge, there must be at least 30 feet of open space between theunicorn and his opponent. Opponents struck by a charging uni¬corn suffer 3-36 points of damage from impaling. Unicorns maynot attack with their front hooves in the round they charge.Once per day a unicorn can use a teleport spell of limitedrange. This spell will transport the unicorn {and its rider) to anyplace that the unicorn desires* up to 360 yards away. Unicornsoften use this ability as a last resort to avoid death or capture.In addition, unicorns can never be charmed or he/d by magic.They are immune to death spells and make all saving throwsagainst spells as if they were wizards of 11th level. Unicorns areimmune to poison.Habitat Society: Unicorns mate for life and make their home inan open dell of the forest they have chosen to protect. There, inthe boles of the trees, unicorns etch a glyph, recognizable to syl¬van creatures, indicating that the forest is under unicorn protec¬tion, Rangers have a 10% chance per level of determiningcorrectly whether a forest is guarded by unicorns. Once a wood¬land has a unicorn protector, no other unicorn will enter that for¬est unless the forest is very large. Each family of unicorns stakesout a territory approximately 400 square miles (20 miles by 20miles).Travelers may pass through a unicorn's forest freely and evenhunt there* but anyone killing for sport or damaging the forestmaliciously will be attacked if the unicorn is nearby (10%chance), The ferocity of this attack is determined by the evil ofthe trespasser. Truant youths throwing stones at animals, for ex¬ample, would be driven off with just a few bruises as a reminder,while pillaging ores would be hunted down and slainLone unicorns occasionally allow themselves to be tamed andridden by a human or elf maiden of pure heart and good align¬ment. A unicorn that submits once and is treated kindly will actas the maiden's steed for life, even carrying her beyond the realmof his forest if she so desires. Unicorns make exceptionally loyalmounts and will protect their riders even unto death.Ecology: Unicorns are herbivores, living on tender leaves andgrasses. Their only enemies are griffons and those creatures whodestroy forests, in particular red dragons and ores.The life span of unicorns has never been recorded but is knownto surpass 1,000 years. They are believed to maintain their youthuntil death is only weeks away. The secret to this longevity is thestrong magical nature of the horn, Unicom horns are highlysought after, since possession of one is a sovereign remedyagainst all poisons. Alternately, a single horn can be used, by analchemist, to manufacture 2-12 potions of healing Unicomhorns sell for 1,500 gold pieces or more on the open market.Urchins are a family of marine creatures that, like oysters, arehunted for the value of the stones found in their bodies.They resemble 3-foot-d La meter balls covered with thousandsof 3-inch-long, needle-sharp spines. There are several species ofurchins, which can be distinguished from each other by their dis¬tinctive colors.Combat: Urchins can fire their spines with the distance and ac¬curacy of light crossbows. An urchin can fire multiple spines perround as listed above under "No. of Attacks.' 1 Urchins have noeyes with which to see their opponents; instead they possess aninnate clairvoyance ability. This ability gives all spines fired byurchins a +2 bonus to the attack roll. Damage from an urchinspine varies from species to species and many spines contain par¬alytic or even lethal poisons. Since urchins are covered withthousands of spines, they have a virtually unlimited supply ofammunition.Habitat Society: Urchins are primarily scavengers, scouringthe ocean floors for remains of shellfish. Occasionally they huntfish, but they never attack man-sized beings unless threatened orapproached within 10 feet.Urchins live in the shallows and upon shoals near the coast.They occasionally (10% chance) remain on land during low tideto scavenge for food. While on land, urchins move via rolling,They are capable of surprisingly high speeds when moving thiswayEcology: inside each urchin is a crystalline organ-gem thatseems to have some connection to their innate clairvoyance abili¬ty. While this gem has little value as a stone, it is highly prized byalchemists. The exact value of the organ-gem depends on qualityand the type of urchin it was taken from. To determine a stone'svalue, consult the Treasure" entry above.These distant cousins of sea urchins live strictly on land, Landurchins move on five spindly legs. They are shy creatures andonly attack if approached within ten feet. Their paralytic poisonlasts for six turns. Land urchins have no organ-gem but often(80% chance) form pearls inside their bodies. Old urchins con¬tain 2d6 such pearls, each valued at ld6 x 100 gold pieces.
Of all the chaotic evil undead creatures that stalk the world, noneis more dreadf ul than the vampire. Moving silently through thenight, vampires prey upon the living without mercy or compas¬sion, Unless deep underground, they must return to the coffins inwhich they pass the daylight hours, and even in the former casethey must occasionally return to such to rest, for their power isrenewed by contact with soil from their graves.One aspect that makes the vampire far more tearful than manyof its undead kindred is its appearance. Unlike other undeadcreatures, the vampire can easily pass among normal men with¬out drawing attention to itself for, although its facial features aresharp and feral, they do not seem inhuman. In many cases, avampires true nature is revealed only when it attacks.There are ways in which a vampire may be detected bv thecareful observer, however. Vampires cast no reflection in a glass,cast no shadows, and move in complete silence.Combat: When engaging in combat, vampires are savage andfearsome opponents. They are physically very powerful, with aStrength score of 16/76, receiving a bonus of +2 to hit and +4 todamage The crushing blows of a vampire's attack are so tiercethat they inflict 5-10 points of damage.The gaze of a vampire is one of its most powerful and danger¬ous weapons. Any person who allows the vampire to look intohis eyes will be affected as if by a charm person spell. Due to thepower of this enchantment, a -2 is applied to the victim's savingthrow vs. spell. In this manner, vampires are often able to passposted sentries and surprise their chosen victims.Like all undead creatures, vampires exist in both the PositiveMaterial and Negative Material planes at the same time. Theirpowerful negative essence allows them to drain two life energylevels from anyone they strike. If the vampire is making use ofsome form of weapon in the attack, it cannot employ this power.Weapons of less than +1 enchantment pass through vampireswithout harming them in any wav. Even if attacked with andharmed by magical weapons, vampires regenerate 3 hit pointsper round. If reduced to zero hit points, a vampire is not de¬stroyed, but is forced to assume gaseous form. Once in this state,it will attempt to flee and return to its coffin where, after eighthours of rest, it regains its corporeal form. If the defeated vam¬pire is unable to reach its coffin within 12 turns, however, its es¬sence breaks up and the creature is truly destroyed.S/eep. charm ( and hold spells do not affect vampires. Similarly,they are unharmed by poisons and immune to paralysis Spells thatare based on cold or electricity cause only half damage.At will, vampires are able to disperse their bodies into cloudsof elemental vapor and assume gaseous form , In this state, theyare all but immune to attack and can escape from almost anyconfinement. In addition, vampires can shape change so as totake on the form of a large bat (hence the flying movement rategiven above).Vampires can summon lesser creatures for aid. In a subterra¬nean environment, they will typically call forth a swarm of 10-100 rats or bats. In the case of the latter, these do not physicallyattack but serve to confuse and obscure the vision of the vam¬pire's toes. In the wilderness, a vampire will normally cal) upon3-18 wolves for assistance. In all cases, the summoned animalsarrive in 2-12 rounds.At will, a vampire can use a spider climb ability and scale sheersurfaces. Often, they will employ this power to gain access torooms on upper floors without alerting those on watch down¬stairs. This power also permits the vampire to seek refuge in plac¬es which are all but beyond the reach of mortal men.Despite the great powers w T hich vampires obviously possess,they are not without weaknesses of their own. The odor of stronggarlic repels them and they will not approach it. Further, they willrecoil From the face of a mirror or lawful good holy symbol if ei¬ther of these is presented to them wiLh courage and conviction. It isimportant to understand, however, that this will not actually harmthe vampire in any way nor drive it off. Garlic will prevent thecreature from attacking or entering the area, while mirrors and ho¬ly symbols farce the vampire to find some means of removing theoffending object before it can be bypassed. In most cases, the vam¬pire will seek to overcome these hazards with the aid of its min¬ions, For example, a charmed person might be called upon toattack someone who is holding the vampire at bay with a holysymbol. Another important point to keep in mind is that a lawfulgood holy symbol wiJ) affect the vampire regardless of the vam-
pi re's original religious background. Vampires which are splashedwith a vial of holy water or struck with lawful good holy symbolsare burned by them, suffering 2-7 points of damage.Just as vampires can be kept at bay so too can they be slain bythose who have the knowledge to do so. Any vampire which isexposed to direct sunlight is instantly rendered powerless and,after one round, utterly annihilated. If the vampire can be im¬mersed in running water, it loses one-third of its hit points eachround, until destroyed on the third round. Last, a vampire can bekilled by having a wooden stake driven through its heart. In thiscase, however, the creature can be restored simply by removingthe stake if further measures are not taken to ensure the fate ofthe vampire. In order for it to be completely destroyed, the vam¬pires head must be cut off and its mouth stuffed with holy wafersfor their equivalent).In addition to its aversion to items like garlic and holy sym¬bols, the vampire acts under many other limitations* One of themost powerful of these is the creatures inability to enter a homewithout being first invited to do so by a resident of the dwelling.This does not apply to public buildings and places of businesswhich, by their very nature, extend an "invitation" to all* Once avampire has been invited to enter a residence, it may come andgo freely afterward. A common maimer for obtaining permissionto enter a home is the use of the vampires gaze to charm a ser¬vant or other inhabitant.Any human or humanoid creature slain by the life energydrain of a vampire is doomed to become a vampire himself.Thus, those who would hunt these lords of the undead must bevery careful lest they find themselves condemned to a fate farworse than death. The transformation takes place one day afterthe burial of the creature. Those who are not actually buried*however, do not become undead and it is thus traditional that thebodies of a vampires victims be burned or similarly destroyed*Once they become undead, the new vampire is under the com¬plete control of its killer. If that vampire is destroyed, the con¬trolled undead are freed from its power and become self-willedcreatures.In most cases, vampires do not lose the abilities and knowledgewhich they had in life when they become undead. Thus, it is pos¬sible for a vampire to have the powers of. for example, a wizard,thief, or even priest. In all cases, of course, the new vampire be¬comes chaotic evil.Habitat/Society: Vampires live in areas of death and desolationwhere they will not be reminded of the lives they have left be¬hind. Ruined castles or chapels and large cemeteries are popularlairs for them, as are sites of great tragedies or battles. Vampiresoften feel a strong attachment to specific areas with some morbidsignificance, like the grave of a suicide or the site of a murder.When deciding on a course of action or planning a campaign,vampires move very slowly and meticulously. It is not uncommonfor a vampire to undertake some scheme which may take decadesor even centuries to reach its conclusion. Because of the curse ofimmortality that has fallen upon them, they feel that time is alwayson their side and will often defeat foes who might otherwise over¬come them; the vampire can simply go into hiding for a few dec¬ades until the passing of the years brings down its enemies.Vampires are normally solitary creatures* When they arefound in the company of others of their kind, the group will cer¬tainly consist of a single vampire lord and a small group of vam¬pires which it has created to do its bidding* In this way, thevampire can exert its power over a greater range without runningthe risk of exposing itself to attack by would-be heroes.In general, vampires feel only contempt for the world and itsinhabitants. Denied the pleasures of a true life, they have becomedark and twisted creatures bent on revenge and terror. When avampire creates another of its kind, it considers the new creaturea mere tool. The minion will be sent on missions which the vam¬pire feels may be too dangerous or unimportant for its personalattention* If the need arises, these pawns will gladly be sacrificedto protect or further the ends of their master*Ecology: The vampire has no place in the world of living crea¬tures. It is a thing of darkness that exists only to bring about eviland chaos. Almost without exception, the vampire is feared andhated by those who dwell in the regions in which it chooses tomake its home* The vampires unnatural presence is all-pervasiveand will cause dogs and similar animals to raise a cry of alarm atthe presence of the creature*Vampires sustain themselves by draining the life force from liv¬ing creatures. Unless they have a specific need to create addition¬al minions, however, they are careful to avoid killing those theyattack. In cases where the death of a victim is desired, the vam¬pire will take care to see that the body is destroyed and thus willnot rise as an undead.This breed of vampire is, if anything, even more frightful than itswestern cousin. Although they share many of the western vam¬pires strengths and weaknesses, they have the ability to fadefrom sight at will* Once they have become invisible, they receiveall of the normal bonuses which such a state normally bestows,including being attacked at -4. These monsters are unable tocharm their victims, however, and cannot assume gaseous format will as western vampires can.
Normal: 270Chief/Chieftain: 420Witch Doctor/King: 975A wemic's body consists of a leonine body with a humanoidtorso extending from what would be a lion's neck. The typicalwemic measures ten feet from head to rump. When standing erectin centaurian posture, the wemic stands 6 to 7 feet tall.Most of the body is covered in dusky golden fur, The tail istipped by a brush of long, black hair. Adult males also have amane of long black hair: the mane covers the top and back of thehead and extends to the neck and shoulders. Male cubs developthis mane in their third year. The underbelly is covered in short,white fur. The nose may be black or russet. The eyes are goldwith vertically slit pupils. The digits on all Hmbs end in daws.The claws on the forelegs are retractable,Wemics speak their own leonine language and a highly accent¬ed dialect of the common tongue.Combat: Wemics use forepaws and weapons to attack. A dawdelivers a vidous swipe that inflicts ld4 points of damage. Nor-mally the wemic uses his forelegs to daw and employs his handsto wield a weapon.Wemic males carry javelins and either a stone dub or shortsword. They often carry a tough leather shield (AC 5) for protec¬tion. Females are AC 7 and do not use weapons; however, theygain a +2 bonus to attack rolls if their cubs are attacked* Cubsunder 2 years do not attack,Wemics possess keen senses* They are masters of ambushesand hunting strategy If they cannot surprise an intended victim,1-3 wemics move to outflank prey.Wemics possess powerful leg muscles. They can leap 10 feetupward or 30 feet forward.Habit at/5 ode !y: Wemic sodety is a blend of leonine and ab¬original human cu ltures* They live in groups called prides. A typ¬ical pride consists of 4d4 adult males, 2dl2 adult females, andld!2 cubs.Up to 3dl0 prides often band together into a tribe that is led bya chief. The chief has an Armor Class of 5, 6 + 4 Hit Dice, and itsdaws inflict ld6 points of damage, It gains a +1 bonus to itsattack rolls with any weapon.Sometimes 2d4 tribes join together into a clan or nation. Sucha grand gathering is led by a king and 2d4 chieftains. The kinghas an Armor Class of 3, 9 Hit Dice, and claws that inflict ldBpoints of damage. It has a +2 bonus to its attack rolls with anyweapon.Some wemics are able to use magic. There is a 70% chance thatany tribe includes a witch doctor. Such wemics may attain a max¬imum level of 7th-leve! priest and 4thdevei wizard.Mating occurs at any time of year. The female bears a litter ofone to three cubs in ten months. The cubs are born with a camou¬flage pattern of black spots: these fade within two months*Wemic cubs are playful and curious; they possess few instinctsand thus must learn everything. Cubs are born with 1 HD andgain 2 HD each year. They reach maturity at age 3*Wemics have human-level intelligence. They possess a Stoneage culture, using fire and possessing modest manufacturingskills with which they can create stone weaponry, pottery andornaments. They can be taught more complex skills. They areexcellent trackers and guides. They may hire out their services inexchange for treasure and tools, such as weapons and magicalitems. They may also charge travelers a toll for safe passagethrough their nation's territory.Ecology: Wemic cubs are worth 500 gp. They can be trained asservants or allies.
Whales are the largest sea mammals. They are highly intelligentcreatures that occupy a number of ecological niches. The com¬mon whales include plankton eaters like blue or hump-backedwhales and carnivores like sperm whales,Common whales range in size from a 10-foot-long calf to 110-foot-long blue whales. The skin is normally blue-gray. Whalesshare a common language that is difficult for land creatures tolearn since it uses tones below human hearing.Ecology: Although they are neutral in alignment toward hu¬manoids, their alignment toward sea life is generally lawfulgood. With their great size, power, and diversity, they are Lhemasters of the sea. They preserve order through their conflictswith evilly inclined sea monsters.Unfortunately, their relations with seafarers are less certain,Because of the value placed on parts of the whale's body the crea¬tures are hunted to excess by greedy whalers. Despite the hostibCombat: All common whales can attack with their tails, Thesecan deliver a crushing blow that inflicts damage equal to half thewhale's Hit Dice.Plankton-feeding whales can attack with either of their flukes(fins). Whales of 12-17 HD cause Id8 points of damage, those of18-24 HD inflict 3d8 points, and those of 24-36 HD cause 5d8points.Carnivorous whales can bite. Whales of 12-17 HD inflict 5d4points of damage, those of 18-24 HD cause Id4xl0 points, andthose of 24-36 HD inflict 3d4x5 points.Whales are vulnerable to surface ships only when the whalesare on the surface.Habitat Society: Whales live in tribal gatherings called pods.They maintain strong personal and family ties. Their culture isbased on complex songs that can be heard for miles underwater.Whales are curious about humanoids but if attacked they can be¬come deadly foes. Whales rarely initiate combat . Whales are cu¬rious about other intelligent beings. They welcomecommunication with other beings. They do not lie. but they maynot reveaJ everything they know.Most whales teed on a variety of plankton, shrimp, and smallfish that they suck up as they swim along. Sperm whales feed onlarger fish, octopi, and especially giant squids.Whale cows normally give birth to a single calf. Twins occur in5% of births. The calf remains with the cow for the next five toten years, depending on the species. After five years, the cowmay give birth again, The calves are protected and taught by allmembers of the pod.
ity of the humanoids, whales remain curious and basicallyfriendly toward non-whaling seafarers.The carcass of a common whale is worth 100 gp per Hit Die.both for its meat and blubber. Whales possess a stinking, yellowmass called ambergris that is valuable for making perfumes; theyvomit this tip when ilk The ambergris is worth ld20 x 1,000 gp.Giant whales are immense versions of sperm whales* 100' to 400'long. In the cetacean culture, they serve functions similar toknights or barons by protecting common whales against evil seamonsters and whalers. Giant whales are attended by 2d4 com-mon whales.Giant whales attack by biting or crushing. Whales of 18-25 HDinflict Id4xl0 points of damage, those of 26-35 HD cause 2d4xl0points, and those of 36-54 HD inflict 3d4xl0 points. The tail candeliver a crushing blow that inflicts damage equal to half thewhale's Hit Dice. Giant whales can ram the sides of surface ships,delivering a crushing blow that, if successful sinks the ship.They can also leap halfway out of the water and fall onto a targetvessel (50% chance of success). If successful, the ship is immedbately driven under the surface. If a giant whale is facing an oppo¬nent under 20 feet long, it can swallow the target intact on anattack roll that is 4 or more greater than it needs to hit.Their stomachs contain large air chambers in which a victimmight survive until he escapes or is digested. The stomach add isdiluted by seawater; characters or objects trapped in the stomachgain a +1 bonus to saving throws vs. this acid, A swallowedcharacter suffers 2 points of damage per round (1 if the savingthrow is successful each round) from the add. The stomachmight contain undigested possessions of previous meals. Eachtype of treasure has a 1% chance per Hit Die (of the whale) ofbeing present in the giant whales gullet. There may be 1,000-3,000 coins of each type, ld20 gems, or ld4 magical items.The carcass of a giant whale is worth 100 gp per Hit Die. Theambergris is worth 2d20 x 1,000 gp.The leviathan is an almost unimaginably immense whale, 500 to1/000 feet long. It is the lord of all whales and the intermediary be¬tween cetaceans and the gods. Under normal conditions, only oneleviathan dwells in each ocean. The leviathan is not always active. Itmay hibernate for years on the ocean floor. During these long sleeps,the leviathan is attended and protected by its entourage of otherwhales. The leviathan awakens if summoned by the needs of otherwhales or in answer to a divine request. Leviathans are aw f esomefoes with a variety of attacks. Their bite damage is determined bytheir Hit Dice. Leviathans of 24-35 HD inflict 3d4x5 points of dam¬age, those of 36-47 HD cause 3d4xl0 points, and those of 45-72 HDinflict 3d4xi5 points. The tail can deliver a crushing blow that causesdamage equal to half the whale's Hit Dice. On an attack roll that is 4or more greater than it needs to hit, a leviathan is capable of swal¬lowing a target up to SO feet long. When attacking a mass of surfacevessels, the leviathan creates a powerful wave by swimming deep,rushing to the surface, and leaping halfway out of the water. Theresulting wave causes every ship within 500 feet to roll a savingthrow vs. crushing blow and every ship within 500 to 2,000 feet toroll a saving throw vs, normal blow. Ships that fail a saving throwimmediately sink.Once each century, leviathans gather in arctic waters to conferand to mate. This gathering lasts six months. Each leviathan isattended by 2dl0 giant whales and IGdlO whales of other species.The stomach of a leviathan contains air pockets that are capa¬ble of sustaining a victim until he escapes or is digested. Thestomach may also contain undigested possessions of previousmeals or even sea vessels. Each type of treasure has a 1% chanceper Hit Die (of the whale) of being present in the giant whale'sgullet. There may be 2,000-6,000 coins of each type, 5d20 gems,or IdS magical items.The carcass of a leviathan is worth 100 gp per Hit Die, Theambergris is worth 4d20 x 1,000 gp. However, the killing of aleviathan will result in every whale within that ocean convergingon the killer to avenge their lords death,The killer whale is one of the largest predatory sea mammals. It isa deadly killer able to hold its own against all but the most pow¬erful sea monsters, A killer whale is likely to attack humanoids;it is capable of swallowing a man whole, should the need arise.Killer whales measure 15 to 30 feet long. Their black bodies aremarked by a brilliant white belly and markings that vary fromindividual to individualKiller whales are not inherently hostile and do not attack un¬less hungry or provoked. There is a 20% chance that encoun¬tered killer whales are hungry. If they are communicated withrather than attacked, killer whales may prefer to talk rather thanfeed.The killer whale's diet consists of both fish and warm-bloodedanimals. It is a crafty hunter that can recognize the shadows andsounds made by animals atop ice floes* It will break through theice to visually confirm the presence of prey. Smaller ice Hoes arerammed and shattered to force the prey into the water. When thekiller whale smashes into the ice, every being on the ice must rolla saving throw vs. paralyzation, Failure means Lhe being hasslipped into the water and can be attacked the following round.When a killer whale makes a successful hit, its prey is held Inits jaws where it can automatically bite each round. Victims riskdrowning in two to four rounds and lhe loss of 1 point ofStrength and Dexterity per round, due to the numbing effect ofthe icy water. When either Strength or Dexterity reaches 0, thevictim dies.The killer whale's main weapon is its terrible bite. Killer whalesof 9-10 HD inflict 4d6 points of damage, while those of 11-12 HDcause 6d4 points.When hunting larger creatures, the pod acts together to bringdown prey of up to 100 feet in length.Most pods consist only of adults, but 25% of encounteredpods also have ldft calves (2-5 HD. swim 15, bite for 2d4). Adultsdefend their calves to the death. They also assist each other.Although killer whales prey on other whales, they also act astheir protectors by battling other sea monsters that might deci¬mate the entire cetacean family. Killer whales may enter into alli¬ances with aquatic elves.The carcass of a killer whale is worth 100 gp per Hit Die. Theambergris is worth ldl0 x 500 gp.The narwhal is common to cold, subarctic waters. It is called the'"unicorn of the sea" because of the 6- to 12-foot-Iong spiral hornthat the narwhal uses to dig into the sea floor for shellfish. If anarwhal is provoked, the horn can also be used like a lance toattack. When a narwhal attacks with its horn, its Hit Dice deter¬mine the damage caused, A narwhal of 4 + 4 HD inflicts 2dl2points of damage, one of 5+5 HD causes 6d4 points, and one of6 + 6 HD inflicts 7d4 points. Only a male can develop this horn.A female attacks by ramming headfirst into its target, inflicting2d4 points of damage.Narwhals are basically peaceful creatures. They may serve ascompanions or guards for dolphins. They may also be trainedand used by aquatic elves.The carcass of a narwhal is worth 1Q0 gp per Hit Die. The ivo¬ry is worth Id4xl0 gp. The ambergris is worth Id10 x 200 gp.Hit only by silver or +1 orbetter magical weaponSee belowM (4'-7 p )In ages long past, the word wight" meant simply 'man" As thecenturies have passed, though, it has come to be associated onlywith those undead that typically inhabit barrow mounds and cat¬acombs.From a distance, wights can easily be mistaken for any numberof humanoid races. Upon closer examination, however, their truenature becomes apparent. As undead creatures, wights are night¬marish reflections of their former selves, with cruel, burning eyesset in mummified flesh over a twisted skeleton with hands thatend in sharp daws.Combat: Wights are fierce and deadly foes in combat. Whenattacked, they are unharmed by any weapons that are not forgedfrom silver or enchanted in some manner.The wight attacks with its jagged claws and powerful blows, in¬flicting 1-4 points of damage with each successful strike. In additionto this physical harm, the wight is able to feed on the life essence ofits foes. Each blow that the wight lands drains one level from thevictim, reducing Hit Dice, class bonuses, spell abilities, and so forth.Thus, a 9th-Ievel wizard struck by a wight loses 1-4 hit points andbecomes an 8th-levd wizard; he has the spells and hit points of anSth-levei wizard and he fights as an 8th-level wizard.Persons who are slain by the energy draining powers of awight are doomed to rise again as wights under the direct controlof their slayer. In their new form, they have the powers and abili¬ties of a normal wight but half their experience levels, class abili¬ties, and Hit Dice. If the wight who "'created' 1 them is slain, theywill instantly be freed of its control and gain a portion of itspower, acquiring the normal 4+3 Hit Dice of their kind. Once acharacter becomes a wight, recovery is nearly impossible, requir¬ing a special quest.Wights are unaffected by sleep, charm, hold or cold-basedspells. In addition, they are not harmed by poisons or paralyza-Hon attacks.Wights can be engaged and defeated by individuals who arewell prepared for battle with them. Physical contact with holywater is deadly to wights and each vial splashed on one bums itfor 2-8 points of damage. In addition, a raise dead spell becomesa powerful weapon if used against the wight. Such magic is in¬stantly fatal to the creature, utterly annihilating it.Wights cannot tolerate bright light, including sunlight, andavoid it at all costs. It is important to note, however, that wightsare not harmed by exposure to sunlight as vampires are.Habitat/Society: Like the other undead that infest the world,wights live in barrow mounds, catacombs, and other sepulchralplaces. They despise light and places which are vibrant with liv¬ing things. As a rule, the wight is hateful and evil, seeking to sat¬isfy its hatred of life by killing all those it encounters.Although wights are often found in small groups, they are ac¬tually solitary creatures. Without exception, encounters withmultiple wights will be a single leader and a number of lessercreatures which it has created to serve it. In these cases, the leaderof the group will be more than willing to sacrifice some or all ofits minions to assure its own survival or victory.Ecology: Like all undead, wights exist on both the Prime Mate¬rial and Negative Material planes simultaneously. It is this pow¬erful link to the negative world that gives them their fearsomelevel-draining ability. Further, it is this draining which providesthem with sustenance.As they are not living creatures and have no rightful place inour world, many animals can sense the wight s presence. Dogswill growl or howl with alarm, horses will refuse to enter an areawhich wights inhabit, and birds and insects will grow silent whenthe creature passes near them. In addition, their presence willgradually cause the plant life around their lairs to wither and die,marking the region as unclean.CLIMATETBRRATN:FREQUENCEORGANIZATION:ACTIVITY CYCLE;DIET:The will o'wisp is a malevolent entity that makes its home inswamps, bogs, and moors. It subsists by luring unsuspectingcreatures to their deaths amid the natural hazards of such placesand feeding on the energies which their death struggles release.When encountered in the wild, will o'wisps normally appear asFaintly glowing balls of light. They can alter their own color, shape,and size to some extent and can be easily mistaken for lanterns, lightspells, and similar sources of artificial Illumination.If they do not attack, will o'wisps are able to utterly blank outtheir glows, rendering them m visible to all those who cannot spotinvisible objects, for 2-8 melee rounds.The will o'wisp language is a most unusual one. being purelyoptical in nature. All communication between will o'wisps is bymeans of changes in color or brightness, many of which are fartoo subtle for the average observer to notice. Because this formof exchange is almost impossible to mimic, it is very difficult fortravelers to communicate with these creatures. Exceptional ex¬amples of this race have mastered a very simple sound-based lan¬guage, They produce sounds by vibrating very rapidly and thushave a shallow and ghostly-sounding voice when they “speak."Combat: As a rule, will o'wisps seek to avoid physical combatwith other creatures, preferring to lead them to their deaths in theswamps around them instead. When pressed, however, they aredangerous adversaries who must be attacked with the greatestcare. In combat, they glow blue, violet, or pale green.Will o'wisps are very versatile flyers. They can hover in placewithout effort, often looking like lanterns or similar beacons tolure others toward them. When they decide to move, they can doso with rapid bursts of speed or slow drifting movements.A will o wisp s main weapon in combat is its ability to manifesta powerful electric charge. In melee, it swoops at its foe and at¬tempts to brush against the victim, discharging the stored energy,A successful strike by one of these creatures will cause 2-16points of damage.Those attacking a will o'wisp with any form of physical weap¬on are able to inflict damage normally. Persons making use ofmagical attacks, however will find their powers almost ineffec¬tive against them. As a rule, the only spells which have any effecton the will o'wisp are protection from evil rmgic missile, andmaze. A will o'wisp which is reduced to 5 or fewer hit pointswill attempt to escape. If it is unable to flee, the creature will sur¬render to its attackers and attempt to buy its safety by offering upany treasure which it may have. It is important to note, however,that the chaotic alignment of the will o'wisp can make any agree¬ment with the creature uncertain.Habitat/Soriety: For the most part, will o'wisps will be foundon their own. On rare occasions (10% of the time) groups of upto three may be found near a particularly fertile hunting ground.In the latter case, they will work together to trick victims into thetraps which they have arranged.Ecology: Although difficult to say with certainty, evidence in¬dicates that the will o'wisp feeds on the fury of electrical activitygiven off by the brains of panic stricken individuals as they real¬ize that death is inescapable, In order to prolong the suffering oftheir victims and increase the amount of "food" which they giveoff, will o’wisps will typically lure their victims into areas likequicksand pits which promise a slow- and frightening death.Tt seems certain that the unusual environment found in bogsand swamps is important to the creature s existence in some way,but the exact nature of this link is uncertain. It seems probablethat the ominous and haunting nature of these places increasesthe fear and dread which their victims feel, and thus the energywhich they give off prior to death.
The wolf is a very active, tunning carnivore, capable of surviving innearly every dimateH Shrouded in mystery and suspicion, they areviewed as vicious killers that slaughter men and animals alike for the lackof better things to do. The truth is that never in recorded history has anon-rabid or non-rficrmied wolf attacked any creature having an equal orhigher intellect than itself, (The chance of encountering a rabid wolf thatwould attack anything is 1%, if a lone wolf is encounteredJNorthern wolves exhibit colors from pure white, to grey, to black.Southern wolves are reddish and brown in color. Although fur colorationvary with climate, all wolves have various features in common. They arecharacterized by power* yt jaws; wide strong teeth; bushy tails; tall,strong ears; and round pupils. Their eyes, a gold or amber color, seem tohave an almost emptttkic ability.The most dangerous member of the species, the winter wolf is known forits great size and foul disposition. Living only in chill regions, they canunleash a stream of frost from their lungs once every 10 rounds, causingod4 points of damage to everything within 10 feet. A save vs, breathweapon is allowed for half damage. Cold-based attacks to not harm thewinter wolf, but fire-based attacks cause an additional point of damage,per die of damage. Winter wolves are more intelligent than their cousinsand, in addition to being able to communicate with worgs, have a fairlysophisticated language of their own. The winter wolf is beautiful, withglistening white or silver fur and eyes of pale blue or silver, If in goodcondition, a pelt is worth 5.000 gold pieces.Combat; Wolves hunt in packs during winter and late fall when onlylarge herbivores are available. Wolves prefer small prey over the largervariety, because of the amount of energy required to run them down.Even then, they catch only the weak and sickly animals. Wolves usuallyhunt only one large quarry per week, per pack, going without food fordays at a time. During summer months, a single wolf can consume over30 mice in a single day,If a wolf or wolf pack is attacked by humans, they run away lookingback momentarily to make sure they are not being followed. If backedinto an inescapable location, they will attack by tearing at clothing orlegs and arms until they have an opening to escape.Habitat Society: Wolves, like humans and demi-humans, are social ani¬mals. They live, hunt and play in families. There is a very strict socialstructure in these iamily groups that is continually followed. Each pack isled by an alpha mak; his mate is the nlphn female. Only the alpha maleand alpha female breed, but the second ranking female often helps inwhelping and nursing duties.Wolves prefer areas not inhabited by other large predators. Their do¬main has many terrain features in which they can play. Large rocks, fallentrees, and brooks play an important part in their recreational activities.Wolves will leave an area once humans move in.Ecology: Wolves are valuable hunters in the wild. Fear of the wolf hasresulted in their extinction in many areas. This genocide results in amarked increase in rodenls and deer population that has nearly demol¬ished the surrounding ecosystems.The dire wolf is an ancestor of the modem species. Though larger in size,they are otherwise similar to their descendants.Worgs are an offshoot oi dire wolf stock that have attained a degree ofintelligence and a tendency toward eviL Worgs have a primitive languageand often serve as mounts of goblins,
High to exceptional (13-16)EL 50 % of S, TChaotic evil2- 12 and weaponSinging brings on lethargyIron or +1 or better weapon tohitThe wolfwere is an evil and hateful creature that delights in thebrutal slaying of humans and demihumans alike. In many cases,the wolfwere is able to attack its victims with utter surprise be¬cause of Us ability to assume the shape of a human of exceptionalcharisma.The wolfwere is able to assume a wide variety of shapes at will.Transformation from one form to another takes only a singleround Its true shape, and that in which it prefers to spend thevast majority of Us time, is that of a large wolf. When in thisstate, it is almost indistinguishable from a dire wolf.When a wolfwere is attempting to lure humans or demihumansinto an ambush, it will assume the shape of member of their race.Almost without exception, the new persona will not be of thesame sex as the potential victim, Thus, a wolfwere which is stalk¬ing a male elf will transform itself into a female elf. In ail cases,the newly disguised wolfwere will have exceptional physicalbeauty,Combat: The wolfwere is a sly and dangerous adversary. In ad¬dition to its great fury and fighting prowess, its high intelligencemust not be overlooked or underestimated.When a wolfwere first spots unsuspecting humans or demLhumans in its territory, it will change into its fully humanoidform and assume the guise of a pilgrim, minstrel, or similar wan¬derer The wolfwere will normally carry some form of stringedinstrument which it seems to absent-mindedly play at while ittravels. The true nature of its song, however, is terrible and oftenfatal. Anyone who hears the wolfwere s song and then fails a sav¬ing throve vs, spell will be overcome with lethargy. The effects ofthis enchantment are the same as those of the skw spell. Oncethis effect begins, it cannot be countered and lasts for 5-6 rounds.When a wolfwere is ready to attack, the creature again changesits shape. Now, in a form which is half-wolf and half-human (ordemihuman • it strikes. The wolfwere will almost always changeinto this form when it engages in combat because it has the abilityto bite like a wolf and also wield a weapon of some type.In any form but its fully humanoid one, the creature can deliv¬er a savage bite with its powerful jaws. It is this mode of attackwhich the monster prefers to employ above all others.When in its humanoid or half-humartoid state, it is also able tocarry and employ weapons. Although the exact type of weaponused will depend upon the specific tastes of the creature encoun¬tered, wolfweres lend toward axes, swords, and similar cuttingedges.If the creature is forced to engage in battle while in its human¬oid form, it will be forced to rely wholly on its weapons for de¬fense. In such cases, it normally seeks to escape and transforminto its ha If-humanoid state before returning to battle.The magical nature of the wolfwere makes it immune to dam¬age inflicted by any weapon which is not made from coldwrought iron or enchanted to +1 or better. All other weaponsare simply turned aside by the creature's hide.It is possible to protect oneself from attacks by wolfweres,however, For they are disgusted by wolfsbane and will avoid itwhenever possible.Habit.it.Society: The wolfwere is generally fairly solitary in na¬ture. When encountered in the wild, it is rare that more thanthree of these creatures will be found. In almost all cases, en¬counters with more than one wolfwere will be with a mated pairor a group which has decided to work together to increase thesuccess of their hunting.Ecology: There is a 75% chance that any encountered wolfwerewill be running with a pack of wild wolves. In such cases, theanimals will be worgs 70% of the time. If they are not worgs,they will be common wolves. In all cases, the influence of thewolfwere will make the creaLures far more vicious and evil thanthey might normally be.Despite their fondness for wolves and worgs. wolfweres loathethe company of werewolves. The enmity between these twomonsters is so great that they will often attack each other onsight.Though they vary widely in size, all the worms in this listinghave some common characteristics. They are all burrowers withlong, cylindrical shapes.A constant threat to subterranean explorers, the purple wormburrows through the earth in search of prey. The worm is sensi¬tive to minute vibrations in the earth, and can sense prey at arange of 60 feet. Adult purple worms as large as 8-9 feet in diame¬ter and 140-150 feet long have been reliably reported.The worm attacks by biting; an attack roll that exceeds the re¬quired score to hit by 4 or more indicates the victim has beenswallowed whole. This worm can devour creatures up to 8 feettall and 6 feet wide, A swallowed creature dies in six rounds, isdigested in two hours, and cannot be raised from the dead. Any¬one trapped inside a purple worm may attempt to cut their wayout. The interior is AC 9, but digestive juices weaken the victim,causing a cumulative -1 penalty to the damage the victim cancause, This worn has a stinger on its tail. Anyone hit by thestinger suffers 2d4 points of damage and must make a successfulsaving throw vs. poison or be slain instantly.The purple worm is solitary and seeks a companion only tomate. The moment a new worm hatches, it burrows into theground, never to be seen by its siblings again. As the worm tun¬nels, it consumes vast amounts of material that are excretedwhen it returns to its lair. Among the discharged substances areprecious metals and gems.The mottled worm is an aquatic variety of the purple worm. Itinhabits shallow bottom muck, but it often surfaces to search forprey. Otherwise, it is the same as a purple worm.The thunderherder is desert variety of the purple worm; theytravel in herds of 10-100, several feet under the sands. They feedon small creatures in the sand, their bodies ejecting sand. Theyare 3-5 feet in diameter and 5-10 feet long, and have 7 Hit Dice.Their mouths are unable to cause damage, but their passage be¬neath an area causes an earthquake-like effect.These worms are mottled green in color, with a dark, slimy,brown underbelly* A giant bloodworm attacks when hungry orwhen stepped on, by trying to fasten its mouth to its victim. If ithits, it causes 1 d8 damage, and continues to cause ld8 damageper round from blood drain, until killed or removed (removalrequires a successful open doors roll).These worms are especially vulnerable to fire, taking doublenormal damage from such attacks, or full damage when theymake a successful saving throw despite a ~2 penalty to the roll.This worm can change its normal gray color to match its sur¬roundings; opponents suffer a -6 to surprise rolls. Bookwormsinhabit libraries, eating through the pages and bindings foundthere. They cannot eat living matter, but they will burrowthrough dead wood, leather, and other normal book materials ala rate of 3 inches per round. They are very fast and seek to avoidcapture and combat when discovered.These maggot-like creatures live in refuse* If they touch exposedskin (they have a percentage chance to do this equal to the vic¬tim's AC, not counting shield), they burrow into the flesh andsecrete a mild poison that deadens the burrowing area; a victimmust make a successful Wisdom check to notice the burrowing;one check is allowed each round* Fire kills 2dl0 grubs per appli¬cation to infested flesh, but after ld6 rounds they are too deep tobe burned. A cure disease will kill the rot grubs. If the worms arenot stopped, they reach the heart in ld3 turns, killing the victim.
The wraith is an evil undead spirit of a powerful human thatseeks to absorb human life energy.These horrible creatures are usually seen as black, vaguelyman-shaped clouds. They have no true substance, but tend toshape themselves with two upper limbs, a torso, and a head withtwo glowing red eves This shape is a convenience born from thehabit of once having a human body.Combat: The touch of a wraith does damage in two ways.First, the chilling effect of the touch inflicts 1-6 points of damage,even to creatures immune to cold. Second, such a hit drains alevel of experience from its victim. This includes hit points andall abilities associated with that level, such as spell casting orcombat ability. The damage from the chill can be healed normal¬ly, but the experience points are gone forever and must be earnedagain or magically restored.Wraiths are immune to normal weapons. An attack with sucha weapon merely passes through its body with no effect, Silverweapons cause only half normal damage. Magical weapons in¬flict their full damage, causing a black vapor to boil away fromthe body of the wraith, A wraith slowly regains its full hit pointsif left alone for at least a week (recovering one point every eighthours). Like most undead, wraiths are immune to sleep, charm ,hold, death and cold-based spells. They are immune to poisonand paralyzation* A vial of holy water causes 2-8 points of dam¬age (as arid) upon striking the body of a wraith, A raise deadspell will utterly destroy one if a saving throw vs. spell is failed.Wraiths attack humans or demihumans in preference to othercreatures. However, animals will sense their presence within 30feet and refuse to advance further, panicking if forced. A pack ofwraiths will try to get surprise when attacking, and will wait andposition themselves for the most advantageous moment to at¬tack. Wraiths are very intelligent and tend to cluster around theweaker members, or stragglers, when attacking. Any humankilled by a wraith becomes a half-strength wraith under its con¬trol (e.g,, a lOth-level fighter will become a 5 Hit Die wraith un¬der the control of the wraith that slew Kim).This foul creature has no power in direct sunlight and will fleefrom it. Sunlight cannot destroy the wraith, but the undead crea¬ture cannot attack in sunlight. It shuns bright (e.g., continue?/)light sources in general, but will occasionally attack if the com¬pulsion to do so is strong.Habitat'Sodety: A wraith is an undead spirit of a powerful,evil human. As such, it is usually found in tombs or places wheresuch men and women would have died. Since such men andwomen are frequently buried together, in the case of the wealthy,or with their families, wraiths are most commonly encounteredin packs. Those that died or were buried alone might still be en¬countered in packs, because a human who dies from the touch ofa wraith becomes a wraith under the sway of its slayer. The trea¬sure of the wraith is usually its possessions in life, now buriedwith it, or those of its victims. Wraiths exist only to perpetuateevil by absorbing the life force of as many people as possible, Acharacter who becomes a wraith is nearly impossible to recover,requiring a special quest.The wraith cannot communicate, except through a speak withdead spell. They do not even seem to communicate with eachother, except as master to slave for combat strategy. Any attemptto speak to a wraith is met with scorn, unless by a very powerfulparty. In that case, the wraith desires only to flee. Wraiths can bedominated by powerful evil creatures, particularly other undead,priests, and wizards, and made to serve their will.Ecology: The wraith has no proper niche, serving no usefulpurpose in nature and providing no byproducts that others canuse. It requires no nourishment, killing only for the sheer hatredof life. All creatures close to nature will shun the presence of awraith. It exists more in the Negative Material plane than in thePrime Material plane, and thus is not a natural part of this world.
A distant cousin to the dragon, the wyvern is a huge flying lizardwith a poisonous stinger in its tailThe 35-ioot-long dark brown to gray body of the wyvern ishalf tail. Its leathery batlike wings are over 50 feet from tip to tip.The head alone is 4 feet long and filled with long, sharp teeth.Unlike the dragon, it has only hind legs, using them the same waya hunting bird would The tip of the tail is a thick knot of carti¬lage from which a 2- foot-long stinger protrudes, very much likethat of a scorpion. The eyes are red or orange. A wyvern doesnot have a strong odor, although its lair might smell of a recentkill. These beasts can make two sounds; a loud hiss, whichsounds like a hot sword plunged into water, and a low, deep-throated growl, much like that of a bull crocodile.Combat: Rather stupid, buL aggressive, wyvems will nearly al¬ways attack. In combat, the wyvern always prefers to be flying,and will seize any opportunity to take flight and continue com¬bat. If trapped on the ground it will bite (2-16 points of damage)and use its stinger (1-6 points of damage), attacking the mostconvenient target or targets. The lad is very mobile, easily strik¬ing over the back of the wyvern to hit an opponent to its front.The stinger injects poison (type F) into the wound, against whichthe victim must make a save vs. poison or die. Even if the savingthrow is successful, the victim suffers 1-6 points of physical dam¬age from the sting.From the air the wyvern is a far more deadly opponent. It divesupon ground targets, attempting to snatch them up in its two tal-oned daws (1-6 points of damage each) and fly off. Man-sizedvictims are snatched if at least one talon hits for damage. Largevictims require both talons to hit in order to snatch them up. Thewyvern cannot fly while carrying anything bigger. After a dive,it takes the wyvern a full round to circle around. On the nextround it can dive again. Once airborne with prey in its talons, thewyvern stings and bites each round, both at +4 to hit, until thevictim is motionless. In aerial combat, the wyvern will make apass during which it will either bite or sting. Then it will land andfeast, not hunting again until the next day.As a hunter, the wyvern is cunning. It will avoid letting itsshadow fall across its prey as a w T aming. The final approach ofthe dive is done in complete silence, imposing a -2 surprise modi¬fier on the target. It trails its prey from downwind whenever pos¬sible. A mature wyvern often waits for the right moment tostrike, and is willing to let prey go that is too powerful or withineasy reach of cover. Such a wyvern understands that men, partic¬ularly those armed in bright metal, are stronger than their sizewould indicate. Given a perfect opportunity, it will attempt tosnatch up an unarmored member and fly out of range.Habitat/Sodety: The wyvern is a solitary creature, nesting onlywith its mate and young. It tends to lair on mountainsides thatoverlook forests, jungles, or sometimes plains. A wyvem makesits lair in large caverns that can be found in such places, stakingout a territory about 25 miles across. If game is sparse, it willhunt with a small group of its own kind. Only young wyvernsattack others of their kind, usually to establish new territory.Older wyverns settle disputes in an unknown manner withoutactual combat.Some wyvems have been known to work with evil dragons.Usually these dragons completely dominate the weaker andsmaller wyverns.Ecology: An adult wyvern consumes the equivalent of a man-sized to large creature once per day. This could translate to ahorse, pig, or a handful of sheep. While it eats them whole thebones are not digested, and neither are metal objects, Thewyvern eats carrion only if desperate.The wyvern has no natural enemies, although it would not bea match for certain powerful creatures. It is noted for the foultaste of its flesh. No one has found a way to cure its hide and thebones are light and brittle to aid in flying. Certain body parts areused by spell casters as spell components, for which they will paya reasonable price.The xom (zom) are natives to the elemental plane of Earth,The wide body of a xorn is made of a pebbly, stone-like material. Ithas a large, powerful mouth on top of its head with three long arms,tipped with sharp talons, symmetrically positioned every' 120 degreesaround it. Between the arms are large, stone-lidded eyes that see in alldirections. At its base are three thick, short legs, each directly beneath aneye. The whole body is designed for burrowing, mouth first.Combat: Xorn do not attack flesh creatures except to defend them-selves or their property, since they can not digest flesh, Xorn have noexcessive love or hate for creatures of the Prime Material plane. Thesole exception to this is anyone carrying a significant amount of pre¬cious metals or minerals, which it can smell up to 20 feet away. Thenormally peaceful xom can become quite aggressive when after food,especially on the Prime Material plane, where such sustenance isharder to find than it is on its native plane. Xom expect to be given areasonable portion in exchange for peaceful passage, or else they at¬tack (90% chance) to get food.In combat, xom have two different methods of fighting. Against a sin¬gle opponent, they bend the two legs nearest the opponent deeply, an¬gling their bodies toward the enemy. In this way all four attacks can bebrought to bear. Against several opponents, they attack with arms in alldirections, each striking at a different target. One of the targets suffers asecond attack, as the xom angles its body down to bite.If necessary, a xom can use its ability to blend into the surroundingstone to impose a —5 penalty to opponents surprise rolls when itattacks. This incorporates a blending of coloration and its physicalability to pass into and through stone. This does not happen veryoften, since a xorn is more likely to ignore a party, or openly demandmetals. However once combat begins, it can use a variation on thistheme. The xom may pass through the nearest stone (usually thefloor) and vanish for 1-3 rounds, It then lunges out of a stone surfaceto gain surprise, often at the feet of an opponent, attacking with threearms and its mouth. This guerrilla warfare can continue indefinitely.During any round that it passes through stone, a phase door spellkills it instantly. If fight goes against it, the xom retreats to the near¬est stone surface.A xom is immune to fire and cold, both magical and normal. Elec¬trical attacks cause half damage if the xorn fails its saving throw, andno damage if the saving throw is successful. Edged weapons causeonly half damage to xom. though blunt and piercing weapons do fulldamage. A move earth spell flings a xorn back 30 ieet, and the crea¬ture is stunned for one round A stone to flesh or rode to mud spelllowers its AC to 8 for one round. During that round the xom willattack, as it is readjusting its substance back to stone. Lastly, apusswatl spell inflicts Idl0 + 1Q points of damage on a xom.Habitat Society: A xom is normally found on the elemental plane ofEarth, It is only on the Prime Material plane if forcibly summoned orif it was the victim of an interplanar accident.On their native plane, xom are as peaceful as Prime Material planeherbivores. While xorn are intelligent, their society is limited to smallclans of mineral gatherers. These dans wander from place to place,leaving behind open pockets where they have eaten out a vein ofmineral. On the Prime Material plane they always seek wide regionsof stone underground, What humans would consider treasures, xomconsider food. They keep their store of food in a nearby air pockets.Ecology? On the Prime Material plane, they are visitors that serve noecological function. On their own plane, they are gatherers, eatingonly stone and minerals. The empty pockets in the stone are quicklyinhabited by various creatures of the plane, Dao have been known tohunt them for sport. Equally as often, xom serve dao as slaves.Xaren are relatives of the xom f with identical abilities in combat.Xaren resemble xorn closely, though they are slightly smaller andtheir hides are shinier, almost metallic. Unlike ordinary xom, theycrave magical metal as food. For each plus of enchantment they eat,they permanently gain I hit point, up to their maximum of 45. Evenafter reaching their maximum growth, they still require magicalmetal to maintain their health. They can smell magical metal up to 40feet away.Like xorn, xaren expect handouts. They demand magical metalfrom creatures with enchanted weapons or armor, and attack if theyare denied. They prefer iron, copper, silver, gold and electrum (inthat order), though they will also snack on metallic ore.It attacked with a magical weapon, xaren can make an attack rollagainst AC —2 to bite an opponent s weapon. If they hit. the weaponmust save vs. crushing blow or be destroyed,Xaren and xom are indifferent to one another and rarely cooper¬ate, Dao do not enslave xaren, though they do hunt them.
Sometimes confused with the abominable snowman t the yeti is adistant cousin to the great carnivorous apes of warmer climates.An adult yeti stands 8 feet tall and is covered in long, white fur.Their feet and hands are wide and flat, which helps to dispersetheir great weight (about 300 pounds) on treacherous snowfields. They travel on all fours like the apes, but fight very com¬fortably standing erect. Unlike most apes and gorillas, the yetidoes not have an opposable toe on its feet. They wear no clothingor ornamentation. The spoor, or smell, of a yeti is very subtle incold climates, but in confined or warm areas, they have a strong,musky odor. The eyes of a yeti are icy blue or almost colorless,Their claws and flesh are ivory white. Unlike many arctic crea¬tures, the yeti does not have a thick layer of body fat to keep itwarm. Instead, it relies upon the special properties of its thick,warm fur. It has a transparent second eyelid, which allows thecreature to see in blowing snow, and prevents its eyes from freez¬ing in extreme temperatures.Combat: The yeti is a fierce hunter of the polar regions. It stalksits prey and lays an ambush, attempting to gain surprise. A fa¬vorite trick is to get ahead of its prey and lie in a depression in thesnow, or dig a shallow pit and cover itself with snow. Suchworks can be detected only by natives of the arctic regions, andthen only 25% of the time. Against the snow, the yeti is invisibledue to its coloration until its prey is 10 yards away. Under a thinlayer of snow' it is completely invisible,Any opponent surprised by a yeti must save vs. paralyzationor go rigid with fright for three rounds, indicating that he haslooked into the icy blue depths of the yet i s eyes. Any opponentthat is paralyzed in this way can be automatically hit by bothdaws and squeezed.Although the yeti does have fangs (1-4 points of damage), itdoes not usually attack with them, preferring to use its formida¬ble claws, If any hit with daws is made with a natural 20, thevictim is pulled in for a chilling squeeze, The creature's fur actu¬ally absorbs heat, making it extraordinarily cold if contacted (2-16 points of damage if squeezed). The heat-absorbing property ofthe yetis fur can work against it: damage from heat is 50%greater than normal.Habita ^Society: Although the yeti is of average intelligence, ithas no civilization. They can use simple tools, including man¬made weapons, but will not make any themselves. Yeti live in icecaves in hills and mountains. Sometimes these are natural, some¬times they are excavated by the yeti or enlarged to accommodatethe family. Most yeti treasure consists of Items recovered fromthe bodies of explorers.Life is harsh in the arctic, and friends and food ate hard to find,making survival and reproduction the yeti's only goals. The yetiwill associate only with its immediate family, the young leavingto fend for themselves as soon as they mature. A family usuallyconsists of an adult male with one to three females and a 50%chance of 1-6 young if females are present. In an attacking group,the largest yeti is the male, the next largest ones are his mates.Any others are small males or females that are due to leave thefamily soon.Ecology: Any living creature not of its family is considered po¬tential food, including other yeti. This does not make them fool¬hardy: only a starving yeti will attack an obviously strongerparty Their typical diet consists of herd creatures, such as cari¬bou, bears, wolves, and other creatures inhabiting the snowymountains in which they live. The yeti may turn to scavenging inhard times. They range across a wide area in search of food, usu^ally 15 miles in all directions from their lair.Yeti daws and teeth have value only because of the rarity ofthe creature. They sell for about a gold piece a tooth or claw onthe open market. Yeti fur is another story. It is prized by thoseliving in cold climates for its extraordinary ability to keep itswearer warm, A full grown yeti pelt can fetch up to 300 goldpieces on the open market.Level DfoSd/Dev Attack Defense Power Score PSPsHD-2 3/levd MX, IF, TW = Int 15 * MultClaireen lienee* danger sense, feel sound,, poison sense*. Psyeombeta-holism - Animal affinity* (snake), metamorphosis (snake), chame¬leon power*, chemical simulation*, flesh armor.Telepathy - attraction (to snakes), aversion* (to snakes), false sensoryinput, inflict pain, invincible foes, life detection, phobia amplifica¬tion*, post-hypnotic suggestion, repugnance (to snakes), taste link*.Descendants of humans whose blood has been fouled, yuan-ti havevarying degrees of snake!ike body parts. They are highly Intelligentand evil, always plotting to advance their causes.There are three major varieties of yuan-ti: pwreh/ood!s r halfbreeds,and abominations. A pureblood can pass for human 80% of the time.It has only slight differences from true humans, such as slit eyes, or aforked tongue, maybe even small fangs. Halfbreeds are part humanand part snake. Roll a d6 twice on the table below: a duplicate rollproduces no result, but is not rerolled. Ignore unworkable combina¬tions. This is a general guide: the DM can invent his own combina¬tions of snake and human,Bites tor 1-10 points damage+1 to saves using DexterityConstricts for 1-4 points ofdamageEach bites for 1-6 points damageAmor Gass 0Constricts for 1-4 points ofdamageAbominations are either all snake (50%) or have only a single humanfeature, either head or arms, and are of large size (10 feet long).Halfbreeds and abominations disdain wearing human clothing or armor,while purebloods do not , All yuan-ti use weapons and other items. Yuan-ti do not give off an odor that humans can detect, However, animals willdetect a dry. musty smell on them. The snake features of these foul crea¬tures vary greatly from simple green and brown scales to wild patterns ofstripes, diamonds, and whorls In reds and blues. Yuan-ti speak their ownlanguage. They can also speak with any snake or snakelike creature.Those with human heads speak common besides.Combat: Yuan-ti are geniuses, and fight as such. They plan elabo¬rate traps and utilize their surroundings superbly in combat. Theyprefer ambushes to direct confrontation. In a mixed group, the leastvaluable and powerful attack the opponent first. This means that thepurebloods go before the half-breeds, which go before the abomina¬tions. The group leader may order particular members forward be¬fore others if it provides for a better strategy. When encounteredoutside their temple area, only one to four of them are in a group. Inthe temple area they can be found in much larger groups.Purebloods have 6 Hit Dice, half-breeds have 7 or 8 Hit Dice, andabominations have 9 Hit Dice. All yuan-ti, if they have hands, al¬ways use weapons, preferring those with an edge. They use poison,particularly slow acting types, but in traps, not on weapons.Any yuan-ti with a human head can cast the following spells onceper day; cause fear darkness £15 foot radius), snake charm, sticks tosnake s, neutralize poison, suggestion, and polymoq^h otherHabitat/Society; Yuan-ti are devout worshippers of evil. They alsohold all reptiles in high esteem, The center of yuan-ti life is the tem¬ple. They tend toward old ruins far away from man, but have evenbeen known to build underneath human cities. Their own works tendtoward circles, with ramps and poles replacing stairs. In all cases theyare secretive about the location of their city or temple. The abomina¬tions rule over the yuan-ti, and are the leaders of the temple, with thehigh priest (human-headed) ruling over all. Their rituals often in¬volve bloody sacrifices. The purebloods take care of all outside nego¬tiations, always pretending to be human. Yuan-ti speak their ownlanguage and common.Ecology: Ages ago, a cult of humans worshiping a reptilian eldergod recieveda ' blessing ' from their dark lord: their offspring all werepart snake. Since then the breeding line has been polluted and mixed,producing purebloods (those least favored), half-breeds, and abomi¬nations {the truly blessed). They are strictly carnivorous, eating anywarm-blooded creature they can catch. They have a special taste forbirds and human flesh. They are clever enough about their ecologynot to overturnt any particular region. Larger groups keep captiveherds of wingless birds or other warm-blooded creatures.
1-2/1-2/1-3See belowSee belowSee belowM (5'-6' tall)Average (10)120Once human, yuan-ti histachii are near-mindless abominationswho have been transformed into reptilian humanoids to servetheir yuan-ti masters. Most often, they are found guarding yuan-ti brood chambers.Histachii are hairless creatures. Their clothing, little more thanfilthy rags, hangs limply over their emaciated bodies. Their grayor yellow-green skin is tough and scaly, and smells faintly of rot¬ting meat. They have beady bloodshot eyes, and their forkedtongues continually dart in and out of their mouths. Their dullyellow teeth are like tiny hooks, razor-sharp. Their fingernailsare black and twisted, resembling the claws of a lizard.Histachii speak in short, hissing phrases. They know the lan¬guages of yuan-ti and all snakes and snakdike creatures, as wellas the languages they spoke in their original human lives.Combat: Histachii attack any nonreptilian creature or humanoidon sight, unless their yuan-ti masters give them orders to the con¬trary. Unsophisticated fighters, most histachii charge directly attheir opponents, attacking with their claws and teeth, To protecttheir yuan-ti masters, histachii will fight to the death.Regardless of their abilities in their former lives, histachii donot wield weapons or use magic. Once per day they can becomeberserk. In this state, they are so enraged that they gain a +2bonus to their attack rolls. The berserk condition persists for 2-12(2d6) rounds.Unlike yuan-ti, histachii have no natural magic resistance.However, they are immune to all types of hold and charm spells.Habitat Society: Yuan-ti create most histachii servitors from hu¬man prisoners. They also may transform human worshipperswho voluntarily agree to become histachii. Humans become his¬tachii by drinking a distillation of yuan-ti venom mixed with cer¬tain herbs and roots. (The yuan-ti prepare this specialconcoction.) If a human is unwilling to drink, the yuan-ti pintheir captive to the ground and pour the mixture down histhroat.Any human who drinks this mixture, whether by choice or byforce, must make a saving throw vs. poison with a -4 penalty. Ifthe saving throw fails, the victim becomes a histachii in 7-12(ld6 + 6) days. If the save is successful, the victim immediatelylapses into a coma: death will Follow in one hour, A comatosevictim can be revived with a s/ou? pofson or neutralize poisonspell, presuming the spell is cast within 1 hour after the mixturehas been swallowed. Human-headed yuan-ti have the ability toneutralize poison, and they may save a comatose victim them¬selves, It is not for the victim's benefit. A human who fails hissave after drinking the mixture may suddenly find himself aliveagain, only to face another flask of the mixture when the yuan-tiattempt another transformation.Only humans can become histachii. Nonhumans who drinkthe yuan-ti mixture must also make a save vs. poison with a “4penalty, however, if the save is successful, the nonhuman will beviolently ill, unable to take any action for 1-4 turns. If the savethrow fails, the nonhuman becomes comatose and dies in 2-5rounds.If a human falls his saving throw after consuming the mixture,a few desperate measures may prevent his transformation into ahistachii. If neutralize poison, dispel magic , remove curse , andheal are cast on the victim, in precisely this order, the transfor¬mation process will be reversed. However, the victim will perma¬nently lose 1 point of Intelligence. A wish or a limited wish willreverse the transformation with no loss of Intelligence. Once thetransformation is complete, only a wish can restore the victim tohis former self. Histachij live 20-60 (2dS x 10) years after theircreation. They cannot breed: histachii only can be created fromhuman beings.Histachii are completely submissive to their yuan-ti masters,carrying out their every order without hesitation. The servantsshare the lairs of their yuan-ti masters. Usually, these lairs are inancient ruins deep in tropical jungles, but sometimes yuan-tidwell in subterranean caverns beneath human cities. A histachifsduties include hunting, caring for the yuan-ti's reptile menag¬eries, guarding prisoners, and various custodial chores. In raremoments of leisure, the servants enjoy soaking in pools of coolwater. Histachii do not collect treasure.Ecology: Like yuan-ti, histachii are strictly carnivorous, feastingon rats, worms, and other vermin. They also eat yuan-ti left¬overs.
These yugoloths are summoned by evil wizards or priests toguard something of importance. Yugoloth guardians always de¬fend their charge with great l-erocity.There are three types of yugoloth guardians—least, lessen andgreater. The least and lesser yugoloth guardians vary in size amiform, often being homed and frog-like (least) or ape- or boar-like(lesser), Greater yugoloth guardians always appear as gigantic,winged bears with ram horns protruding from their foreheads,and eagle talons for hands.yugoloths guardian have the ability to speak all languages.Combat: yugoloth guardians can breath fire three times per dayin a cone 3D feet long with a 10-foot base diameter, Damage de¬pends upon the type of daemon breathing. Least and lesser yugo¬loths cause 3do and 5d6 points of damage, respectively, whilegreater yugoloths inflict 7d6 points per breath attack. A success¬ful saving throw vs. breath weapon reduces damage by half.Yugoloth guardians never use their fire breath if the Hre mightdamage whatever they are assigned to protect.All yugoloth guardians are immune to charm, hold, sleep ,polymorph, and fear spells. Lesser and greater yugoloths are alsoimpervious to weapons with less than a +2 bonus. Many of thesecreatures are invulnerable to one or more additional forms of at¬tack (e.g., sword, cold, fire, electricity).Habitat Society: Yugoloth guardians must remain at all timeswithin 90 yards of the object they have been summoned to pro¬tect. Within this 90-yard radius, yugoloth guardians prefer to re¬main at a distance in battle, using their breath weapon tomaximum advantage.Ecology: Summoning a guardian daemon is a dangerous affair.There is a 10% chance for each level the summoner is over 7thlevel of having his request for a guardian daemon granted (maxi¬mum chance of 90%). Conversely if the summoning fails, thereis a 30% chance (-2% per level of the summoner over 10tht thatthe daemon takes offense and gates in to slay the spellcasterThese creatures are often summoned to protect treasures valuedat less than 25,000 gold pieces. Least yugoloths have a 50%chance of being immune to one additional type of attack.Lesser yugoloths are usually found guarding treasures of 25,000gold pieces or more. They have a 80% chance of being impervi¬ous to one additional attack form.These yugoloths are dispatched only to protect objects of exceed¬ingly great value. Greater yugoloth guardians are resistant tomagic (25%) and are always immune to two additional forms ofattack. They can make a suggestion, as the spell, once per round,even when engaged in combat,
Immune to poison, magic weap¬on needed to pierce shellNilThe zaratan is an enormous, passive turtle found in the warmcurrents of Zakharas seas, in the Al-Qadim campaign setting.Thankfully the zaratan spends most of its existence in a pro¬foundly deep slumber.The shell of a zaratan (plural, zaratani) looks like a sloped,rocky mound several hundred feet in diameter The zaratan'shead, over 50 feet across, is often mistaken for a partially-submerged, bamacle-encrus ted boulder. The zaratan usuallykeeps its eyes shut, covered with stony lids that blend with therest of its head in texture and color. The zaratan's four flippers,each over a hundred feet long, appear to be small reefs, support¬ing a variety of corals, barnacles, and small fish. The zaratansrocky shell is considered AC —6, while its head and flippers areonly AC 0. In its dormant state, a zaratan appears to be a small,floating island.Combat; More often than not, once wakened from its slumber, azaratan wilt react to an enemy by withdrawing into its rocklikeshell, against which nonmagical weapons have absolutely no ef¬fect. In addition, no known poison will effect a zaratan with itsincredibly slow metabolism. A zaratan will remain in its shell for1-10 years (if not further provoked) before re-emerging.However, if pestered and wounded for more than 5% of itstotal hit points, a zaratan becomes a terrible opponent. Althoughit attacks last in every round, a single bite from its 40' maw deliv¬ers 10-100 points of damage and will swallow any beings within a10' radius of its target (no save), should its attack roll succeed by4 more than needed.The stomach of a zaratan is a tough, tube-shaped cave. Usu¬ally there is enough stale, trapped air for a creature to surviveindefinitely {if they survived the bite attack), but creaturestrapped within also suffer 2 points of damage per day unless theycan figure out a way to protect themselves from the stomachscorrosive digestive juices. The stomach lining is AC 5. Damageequal to 5% of the zaratans total hit points (a case of painfulindigestion) will result in the victims regurgitation. A zaratan sstomach might contain just about any tiling, depending upon thewhim of the DM, from pieces of driftwood and chunks of ships,to weapons, armor, and even a small amount of treasure (sug¬gested type Z).After a battle, a zaratan will immediately fall into a deep slum¬ber, which typically lasts 1-100 years.Habitat/Society; The slow metabolism of the zaratani assurethem incredibly long (if uneventful) lives, measured in millennia.The zaratani are said to have been floating in the sea long beforethe genies first visited the Land of Fate,At any given time, a zaratan is 99% likely to be sleeping. As itslumbers, it keeps its mouth wide open. Any small to mart-sizedcreatures stupid enough to swim inside (large fish mostly) are re¬flex ively swallowed. The zaratan spends the rest of its time eithermating or conversing with others of its own kind.Every few centuries, by sheer coincidence, a pair of zarataniwill drift into each other. Should they awake (and be of the oppo¬site sex), they will mate. The courtship ritual may take decades,and the mating itself lasts as long as a year.The zaratani communicate with one another in a language sim¬ilar to that of the whales. Conversations between the zaratanioften last decades. On rare occasions, they have been known tocommunicate with other beings via telepathy.Ecology; The older a zaratan gets,, the longer it sleeps. As a re¬sult, many actually become indistinguishable from a floating is¬land or reef, supporting their own mini-ecosystems on theirbroad, rocky carapaces and underbellies. Many sport stuntedpalm trees and vegetation on their shells*The older and wiser zaratani are perfectly content to be attend¬ed by lesser symbiotic beings, provided the symbiotes are not toobothersome and don't interfere with a zaratan s sleep. A few areknown to support small, uncivilized villages, while others haveeven been used as a mobile base for pirates and corsairs!Visitors will find most inhabitants of a zaratan highly supersti¬tious. Many revere their island home as a god. They believe(rightly) that were their deity to awaken due to hunger, their is¬land might sink beneath the sea, destroying their village. As aresult, these villagers strive at every opportunity to keep thezaratan well-fed and content, sacrificing large quantities ofcaught fish and even visitors to placate their floating deity
Zombies are mindless, animated corpses controlled by their crea¬tors, usually evil wizards or priests. The condition of the corpseis not changed by the animating spell. If the body was missing alimb, the zombie created from it would be missing the same limb.Since it is difficult to get fresh bodies, most zombies are in sorryshape, usually missing hair and flesh, and sometimes even bones.This affects their movement, making it jerky and uneven. Usu¬ally zombies wear the clothing they died (or were buried) in. Therotting stench from a zombie might be noticeable up to 100 feetaway, depending upon the condition of the body. Zombies can¬not talk, being mindless, but have been known to utter a lowmoan when unable to complete an assigned task.Combat: Zombies move very slowly, always striking last in acombat round* They are given only simple, single-phrase com¬mands. They always fight until called off or destroyed, and noth¬ing short of a priest can turn them back* They move in a straightline toward their opponents, with arms out-stretched, seeking todaw or pummel their victims to death. Like most undead, zom¬bies are immune to steep, charm, hold, death magic , poisons,and cold-based spells, A vial of holy water inflicts 2-8 points ofdamage to a zombie*Habitat Sodetyr Zombies are typically found near graveyards,dungeons, and similar charnel places. They follow the spokencommands of their creator, as given on the spot or previously, oflimited length and uncomplicated meaning (a dozen simplewords or so). The dead body of any humanoid creature can bemade into a zombie.Ecology: Zombies are not natural creations and have no role inecology or nature.These creatures are made when a wizard drains the life forcefrom a man-sized humanoid creature with an energy drain spell.Their skin is hard, gray, and leathery. Ju-ju zombies have a sparkof intelligence. A hateful light bums in their eyes, as they realizetheir condition and wish to destroy living things. They under¬stand full-sentence instructions with conditions, and use simpletactics and strategies. Since they became zombies at the momentof death, their bodies tend to be in better condition. Ju-ju zom~hies use normal initiative rules to determine when they strike.They are dexterous enough to use normal weapons, althoughthey must be specifically commanded to do so. These zombiescan hurl weapons like javelins or spears, and can fire bows andcrossbows. Their Dexterity allows them to climb walls as a thief(92%) and they strike as a 6 Hit Die monster. Ju-ju zombies areturned as specters.The animating force of a Ju-ju zombie is more strongly tied tothe Negative Material plane. The result is that only +1 or bettermagical weapons cart harm them. Regardless of the magic on theweapon, edged and cleaving weapons inflict normal damage,while blunt and piercing weapons cause half damage. In additionto normal zombie spell immunities, ju-ju zombies are immune tomind affecting spells and pskmics. illusions, and to electricityand magic missiles. Fire causes only half damage.The zombie lord is a living creature that has taken on the foulpowers and abilities of the undead. They are formed on rare oc¬casions as the result of a raise dead spell gone awry. Zombie lordslook as they did in Life, save that their skin has turned to the palegrey of death, and their flesh is rotting and decaying. The odor ofvile corruption and rotting meat hangs about them, and carrionfeeding insects often buzz about them to dine on the bits of fleshand ichor that drop from their bodies.The zombie lords can speak those languages they knew in lifeand they seem to have a telepathic or mystical ability to conversefreely with the living dead. Further, they can speak with deadmerely by touching a corpse. Zombie lords are turned as vam¬pires.When forced into combat, it relies on the great strength of itstwo crushing fists. The odor of death surrounding the zombielord is so potent it causes horrible effects in those who breathe it.On the first round a character comes within 30 yards, he mustsave vs, poison or be affected m some way* The following resultsare possible:5 Character unable to act for ld4 rounds due to nau¬sea and vomiting,6 Character dies instantly and becomes a zombie un¬der control of the zombie lord,All zombies within sight of the zombie lord axe subject to itsmental instructions. Further the creature can use the senses ofany zombie within a mile of it to leam all that is happening with¬in a very large area. Once per day, the zombie lord can animatedead to transform dead creatures into zombies. This works asdescribed in the Players Handbook except that it can be used onthe living. .Any living creature with fewer Hit Dice than the zom¬bie lord can be attacked in this manner, A targeL who fails a sav¬ing throw vs. death is slam. In Jd4 rounds, the slain creature risesas a zombie under the zombie lord s command.Zombie lords seek out places of death as lairs. Often, they livein old graveyards or on the site of a tremendous battle—anyplace there may be bodies to animate and feast upon. The mindof the zombie lord tends to focus on death and the creation ofmore undead. The regions around their lairs are often litteredwith the decaying bodies, half eaten, of those who have tried toconfront the foul beast.The zombie lord comes into being by chance, and only undercertain conditions. First, an evil human must die at the hand ofan urtdead creatures. Second, an attempt to raise the charactermust be made. Third, the corpse must fail its resurrection surviv¬al roll. Fourth and last, a deity of evil must show 'favor*" to thedeceased, and curse him or her with the 'gift of eternal life."'Within one week of the raise attempt, the corpse awakens as azombie lord.Sea zombies <also known as drowned ones) are the animatedcorpses of humans who died at sea. Although similar to land-dwelling zombies, they are free-willed and are rumored to be ani¬mated by the Will of the god Nerull the Reaper (or another similarevil deity).The appearance of drowned ones matches their name: theylook like human corpses that have been underwater for sometime: bloated and discolored flesh dripping with foul water, emp¬ty eye-sockets, tongue frequently protruding from betweenblackened lips. Their visage and the stench of decay surroundingthem are so disgusting that anyone seeing a drowned one or com¬ing within 20 feet of one must roll a saving throw vs. poison. Afailed saving throw indicates that the character is nauseated, suf¬fering a -1 penalty to his attack roll and a +1 penalty to his ACfor 2d4 rounds. On land, drowned ones move slowly, with aclumsy, shambling gait. In water, however, they can swim withfrightening speed.Drowned ones have an abiding hatred for the living and attackthem at any opportunity. These attacks often show surprisingcunning (for example, luring ships onto the rocks and attackingthe sailors as they try to save themselves from the wreck).Drowned ones take advantage of their swimming speed by at¬tacking ships as they lie at anchor—climbing aboard the vesseland trying to drive the sailors overboard, where they can dealwith them more easily.Drowned ones attack with the weapons typical of sailors:short swords, daggers, hooks, clubs, belaying pins, etc. Becauseof the unnatural strength of the creatures, these weapons all in¬flict IdlO points of damage. The putrid water that drips from thedrowned ones contains many bacteria, so any successful hit has a10% chance of causing a severe disease in the victim. The water¬logged condition of the creatures flesh means that fire and fire-based magic cause only hall damage. Lightning, electrical, andcold-based attacks inflict double damage. Drowned ones are im¬mune to sleep, charm spells, illusions, and other mind-alteringspells. Because they are created by the direct will of a deity theycannot be turned.Many of the humans who become drowned ones were priestswhile alive, and they retain their powers as undead. There is a50% chance that each drowned one encountered is a priest oflevel ld4. These creatures are granted their spells directly fromNerull (or similar deity), receiving only baneful spells.Drowned ones congregate in loose packs. Their only motiva¬tion is their hatred for the living. They have no need to eat, al¬though they rend and chew the flesh of their prey (this Isprobably just to strike terror in others). Underwater, drownedones are active around the clock and are often found in the sunk¬en wrecks of the ships in which Ihey drowned. They are activeabove the surface during the night. Drowned ones normally strayno more than 100 yards from the water. If the wind drives the fogonto the coast, however, they can roam Inland as far as the togreaches. When the fog retreats, or when the sun is about to rise,they must return to the water.Drowned ones communicate among themselves by a form oftelepathy: they have no need of a spoken language (other thanfor spelkasting). The verbal components for spells are spoken inunintelligible whispers.
